International dimension of late-Soviet ECB persecution. Verified 2026-06-19. Reader text per editorial policy.

--- GEORGI VINS (Wikipedia / Independent obituary / Baptist Press / Find a Grave) ---
"Georgi Petrovich Vins (4 August 1928 - 11 January 1998) was a Russian Baptist pastor persecuted by the Soviet authorities... Following an agreement between Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev and U.S. President Jimmy Carter, Vins and his family were expelled from the Soviet Union in 1979 with a group of other dissidents (Alexander Ginzburg, Eduard Kuznetsov, Mark Dymshits and Valentin Moroz) in exchange for two convicted spies, Rudolf Chernyaev and Valdik Enger."
"When the Council of Churches was formally set up as an underground body in 1965, Vins became its General Secretary... Vins and the Chairman of the Council of Churches, Gennadi Kryuchkov, went on trial in November 1966 and he was sentenced to three years... He was discovered and seized in March 1974. Prodded by the human rights campaigner Andrei Sakharov, the World Council of Churches joined the international protests... Vins was tried in Kiev in January 1975 and sentenced to five years in labor camp to be followed by five years internal exile, becoming the Soviet Union's most famous religious prisoner."
"On the 26th of April, 1979 Vins was woken up in prison... stripped him of his Soviet citizenship. He was being expelled... all five expellees were taken to Moscow airport... It was not until the plane landed in New York that they learned they were being exchanged for two convicted spies, and the handover took place in an isolated hangar at Kennedy airport. The five walked off the plane at one end while the spies walked on at the other. Joined in the United States six weeks later by the rest of his family, Vins made the town of Elkhart, Indiana his home..."
Father: Peter Vins, American citizen of Russian origin, son of Mennonite Brethren leader Jacob J. Wiens; arrested 1930, re-arrested 1935, died/executed 1936 (Find a Grave) / "died in prison in 1943" (Wikipedia) -> DISCREPANCY.
Baptist Press: Vins "had been general secretary of the Council of Evangelical Baptist Churches, the leadership body of 2,000 persecuted congregations... stemming mainly from his stance against the 1929 Legislation Regarding Religious Cults which required any religious groups to be registered." Returned to Russia 1990.

--- HERALD BULLETIN (Howey, citing Carter "White House Diary") ---
"By April 1979, Georgi Vins had spent eight years in a Soviet Union labor prison in Yakutsk, Siberia. Days after he and four other dissidents had been exchanged for two spies, he found himself in a Baptist Church Sunday school class taught by American President Jimmy Carter. 'Since Georgi Vins was with me, the parallel between this lesson and his persecution in the Soviet Union was remarkable,' Carter wrote..."

--- SIBERIAN SEVEN (Wikipedia / Grokipedia / UPI 1983 / Wheaton SC 052) ---
"The Siberian Seven refers to seven out of twenty-nine members of two families of persecuted Pentecostals... who took up residency at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow on June 27, 1978. These seven members represented the Vashchenko and Chmykhalov families, both originally from Chernogorsk, Siberia. The seven stayed at the embassy for five years, until being granted exit visas and permission to emigrate on June 26, 1983, before all 29 members were allowed to leave to Israel on a tourist visa. Sixteen members of the families eventually settled in the United States."
Members: Pyotr & Augustina Vashchenko + daughters Lyuba, Lilya, Lidia; Maria Chmykhalova + son Timofei/Timothy.
"Lidya, 30, went on a hunger strike last Christmas Day [1982] and did not eat again until Feb. 1... Lidya Vashchenko... was allowed to emigrate on April 6 [1983]. Encouraged by the release, the remaining six left the embassy and returned to Siberia later that month." (UPI 1983)
Western advocacy: Kent Hill (Seattle University professor) smuggled out their documents, testified before US Senate; Christian Solidarity International; Reagan-era pressure. Wheaton College Special Collections SC 052 holds the collection; John Charles Pollock wrote book "Siberian Seven".

CONTEXT: Helsinki Final Act (CSCE, 1975) "third basket" human rights incl. freedom of conscience -> gave the West legal language to press the USSR on its own commitments. Framed late-Soviet believer cases as international human-rights issues.
