THE 


MISSIONARY MAGAZINE. 


Vor. L.— JANUARY, 1870. — No. I. 


AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSIONARY UNION. 


TRIP FROM TOUNGOO TO MONAI. 


By Rev. J. N. Cusnine, Rancoon, BurMAH. 


Commencement of the Journey. Tuesday, Jan. 26, 1869.— Notwithstanding the 
many annoyances connected with preparation for an extensive trip into a country ut- 
terly destitute of all Christian influences, we left the city this afternoon and turned 
our faces northward. The monotony of the plain was relieved by the lofty range o 
mountains on the east, which stand out boldly against the sky, and by the less elevated 
and more distant Yoma range on the west, which was bathed in purple haze. Fora 
few miles out of the city, the government is constructing a raised highway over the rice 
plains. This road is straight as the surveyor’s skill can make it. It will be a work of 
immense benefit to the public, when it is completed. ; 

At sunset we arrived at the village of Nepet-in. This is partly Shan and partly 
Burmese. Much missionary labor has been expended upon it ; but its people are very 
indifferent to the truth. 


Danoo Hearers. 27.— Our rest was much interrupted during the night by stam- 
pedes of cattle belonging to Shan caravans encamping near. An adjacent pwe, with 
its accompanying noisy, discordant music, made night hideous. Several times during 
the intervals of silence, we could hear the native assistants telling of the Eternal God 
and His holy law. At daybreak we were on our way. Here and there in the wood- 
land on either side of the road, were clumps of bushes covered with fragrant purple 
flowers. We passed several Burman villages. At Shway Kyet Yet we halted 
through the middle of the day. Our assistants found abundant opportunity for preach - 
ing. Besides the villages, a large Danoo caravan was encamped near by. The Dan- 
00s are a people resembling the Shans in appearance, but of a distinct race, and 
speaking Burmese only. Several listened with attention. 

Leaving Shway Kyet Yet we made a long journey. We entered the large village 
of Toungyo, but did not remain there long. At night we reached the little village of 
Tswa, on the Tswa river. A zayat was in the process of erection by some zealous 
Buddhist. The frame of the roof had been put together on the ground. By laying 
some boards across the beams, we made a floor and roof, so that we had a comfortable 
shelter for the night. The people received our books with readiness, and listened to 
what was said of Christ. 


VOL. L. 1 


2 Trip from Toungoo to Monai. (January, 


28.— This morning passed several caravans of Danoos and Shans. A company of 
Burmans came up with us, who were carrying merchandise to the city of Ningyan. 
They received tracts, some of which several read subsequently in our hearing. To- 
wards sunset we arrived at the English guard station. Its name is Myothla, or Beau- 
tiful City, a misnomer indeed. It is situated on the Sitang river, and has quite a large 
number of houses. The people thronged the zayat, and were eager to talk about the 
religion of the Eternal God. Many tracts were distributed among them and groups 
of travellers halting for the night. The company of Burmese also came up, and en- 
tered into a discussion of the books which they had been reading. Some continued 
their inquiries until late in the evening, and showed a very encouraging spirit. 


Guard Station — Distributing Books. 29.— We started in the beautiful moon- 
light, to escape the heat of travel during the middle ofthe day. A caravan of three 
hundred bullocks met us. Many of them were loaded with Shan paper, which is made 
from the bark of a tree abundant in the Shan country. At an early hour we passed 
the second English guard station, then the boundary pillar, and soon after reached 
the Burman guard station of In-bin-yay-twet. The head officer received us kindly. 
Books were distributed, and we passed on. From this guard station, two roads lead 
northward to Ningyan city. We took the eastern road, which I did not travel last 
year. It was finely wooded, and much of the distance followed a stream of water. 
No villages beside those at the guard stations exist near the boundary on either side, 
In past years residence here has been very unsafe on account of robbers. While 
halting at the zayat, some Burmese came up, who could not understand why we were 
on such a long journey simply to preach. They persisted in attributing some motive 
of personal gain to us. 

At night we halted at the village of Elah. ‘Ihe zayat was near an unoccupied 
kyoung at some distance from the village. Other travellers arrived and occupied ad- 
jacent zayats. These gambled and revelled until the morning light appeared. A 
few villagers only came and listened to the new doctrine. 


Shan Caravans. 30.—The nearly full moon was shedding its silvery light over 
village and plain, and the beautiful morning star had just risen to herald the approach 
of day when we left the zayat. At daybreak we encountered a Shan caravan, of 
more than a hundred bullocks from Monai and Inle yua. Soon after, we met another 
caravan, of three hundred. Large caravans travel this road at this season, and give 
the missionary a fine opportunity to meet people from all sections of the Shan country. 
We pressed forward, passing five or six villages, and reached the city of Ningyan to- 
wards noon, We found accommodations in the house of the “ Teak Forest Compa- 
ny,” where we could remain over the Sabbath more pleasantly than in a zayat. The 
royal order was sent to the Sitkay, as the Woondouk is absent at Mandelay. He sent 
word that he desired tosee the Sayah and Mama. Accordingly towards dark we went 
to his residence. He met us at the door, welcomed us cordially with a shake of the 
hand, and ushered us into his reception room, where he caused fine mats to be spread for 
us. He was very affable, but report does not flatter his character. He requested 
books, and I gave him a New Testament. 


The City of Ningyan. 31.—Sunday. This morning we took a walk about the 
city. We first visited some kyoungs situated on two hills west of the city. They are 
very large buildings of magnificent teak timber. Near them a large number of Chi- 
nese from Yunnan were engaged in makinga highway. These men came from their 
native landin search of labor. The native assistants distributed many tracts. The 
demand for them was greater than I could supply. As books are heavy, the country 
to be passed over extensive, and my bearers of burdens limited, the number of books 
for any place must be proportional to its size. 


: 
Ag 


1870.] Trip from Toungoo to Monai. 3 


In our religious service we read Paul’s defense before Agrippa, and I explained the 
conduct of the great Apostle to the Gentiles. My own soul was strengthened, and 
the hearts of the two Christian men with me were moved. Outside there is no Sab- 
bath, but our souls have rest. When will God give a Sabbath to Ningyan ? 

Feb. 1. — With the Sitkay’s supplementary order, we left Ningyan. The city lies 
on the south side of the Nahlike river, now a shallow stream, but in the rains, a flood. 
During the rains, teak merchants float the logs of timber down from the forests 
above. Many a log lay stranded on the bare sandbanks. The road was over a pret- 
tily wooded country and quite level. We passed through the Burman guard station 
of Thahyahgone without any annoyance. We breakfasted at a lovely zayat. The 
heat of the day was very oppressive, and the shelter of a building or tree extremely 

rateful. 
° As we passed through the deserted village of Hlaibingwai, we found many carts 
halting through the heat of the day. Among the people was a Shan Poongyee, on 
his way to Mandelay. He had visited the principal shrines of Burmah, but his 
round of religious observances was not ended. He received some Shan tracts, and was 
very courteous. 

A long march through a region once inhabited, but now almost deserted, failed to 
bring us to a village before dark. We therefore put up at a zayat, near which wasa 
single house to relieve the solitude of the place. But little food was obtainable. 

2.— We rose at four o’clock in the morning and made a long march before sun- 
rise. A large company of Toungthoos passed us. They were on a pilgrimage to 
Rangoon, to worship Shway Dagon pagoda. Leaving the village of Shway Myo to 
the right, and crossing the Tsin river, two miles brought us to Borthlem, a village 
where an attempt was made to rob me last year. Here, among others, we had conver- 
sation with a Poongyee, who was quite ignorant of Gaudama’s law. 


Discussion of Buddhism. A short afternoon march brought us to Baing In. We 
were speedily surrounded by a large gathering of people. As soon as religion was 
spoken of, a man ‘vas called who is considered the most skilled in the Buddhist law. 
He was put forth as the spokesman of the party, and we were requested to talk with 
him. He evidently had received the teaching of Gaudama without question, and was 
unprepared for many inquiries which we made. All however soon engaged in an an- 
imated discussion which continued into the evening, when we sent them away. There 
was a great desire for books, and no one seemed to have any idea of Jesus Christ’s re- 
ligion. 

The afternoon was cloudy, and we reached the zayat just in time to save ourselves 
from a shower of rain, At this time of the year rain is very unusual. 

3. — Leaving Baing In, we reached Netmagan, where the road northward divides, 
one branch going to Thingoon city, and the other to Yeméthen city. As I travelled 
the Thingoon road last year, I took the Yeméthen road. It was necessary also to 
get the Yeméthen Sithay’s supplementary order. We stopped to eat at Yin-mago. 
Near this was a chorsyah, or station for forwarding royal packages or messages. A 
line of them goes from Ningyan to Mandelay. Ponies are kept; articles are brought 
from the station below, placed upon new ponies and carried to the next station. The 
man in charge here, was very affable. He showed much interest to learn about the 
new religion. Before we left the place, he was called to forward some baskets of be- 
tel-nut for the king. We met him afterwards as he was on the road returning, when 
he expressed regret that he was unable to hear more. Night found us at Touk-yan- 
gin. As there was no zayat we occupied a deserted house. The people did not show 
the curiosity to see and hear which we have noticed in other villages. They also did 
not seem to care much about their own religion, and gave expression to this feeling. 


City of Yeméthen. 4.— We had four miles before us to reach the city of Yemé- 


4 Trip from Toungoo to Monai. (January, 


then. This is the capital of a province of the same name. It is situated in the midst 
of a splendid plain, which is covered with paddy fields in every direction. Villages 
are numerous. South of the city is a lake, which is partly artificial. A moat sur- 
rounds the city. Within this, is a brick wall in a poor state of preservation, sur- 
mounted by a wretched palisade and ahedge of prickly shrubs. There are four 
gates, one on each side of the city. ‘The houses within the walls are very inferi- 
or. The chief object of interest is a large colfection of kyoungs and pagodas north of 
the city. These are reached by two causeways. Some of them are new and finely 
ornamented. The yellow robed priests of Buddh evidently find a fat living here. 

We took up quarters in a zayat just outside of the northern gate, as there is no za- 
yat in the city. The city turned out to see us; men, women, and children crowded 
about us, so that we had room only for sitting and eating. The Sitkay was courteous, 
and our business with him was speedily completed. He received a New Testament. 
The conversation and distribution of tracts was continous during our stay. Thus we 
spread the glad tidings of salvation a little in this dark region ; but large numbers of 
villages are passed through, or seen on either side of the road, at which we are unable 
to tarry. A Burman missionary in this plain might accomplish great results. 

In the afternoon we left Yeméthen. As this city is not on the direct road to the 
Shan States, by the gid of a guide we crossed the paddy plains in the direction of 
‘Tuinyua, where we should reach the great thoroughfare. Passing many villages, we 
arrived after dark at the great village of Chnik-that. The zayat and kyoung are a 
little distance from the village and are really fine buildings. We were so weary that 
we were glad of the quiet which our late arrival secured us. It was necessary to keep 
watch during the night, as the region abounds in thieves. The Shans who bring po- 
nies through this part of the country, often suffer severe losses. All the towns in the 
vicinity are surrounded by fences of prickly trees and shrubs brought from the jungle 
near by. One thief paid us a visit, but decamped on being discovered. 

5. — We passed Shwaynyoungbyo, and other large villages. ‘There were many pa- 
godas of a former generation, which showed that the region was once more populous 
than at present. Our guide to-day proved to be not very well acquainted with the 
road. We lost two hours by going in a wrong direction, on a road which leads over 
the mountains to the Shan country, but is practicable for foot passengers only. We 
had to retrace our steps and endure the scorching heat of the midday sun, before we 
reached Tuinyua. The people recognized me as the one who visited them last year, 
but were no more willing to hear the truth than then. 


Courteous Reception. A circuitous route brought us to Ko ko kan, though there is 
a direct road which we missed. Here we had an exceedingly courteous reception. 
The evening was spent in a friendly discussion of the truth. The head man was anx- 
ious for our safety, and of his own accord sent men to guard us. We never ask for 
such an arrangement, as we should excite suspicions that we had other business than 
religious teaching. The people can see that we carry little to attract desire, for our 
baskets are open. The only cause of fear is that the ponies on which we are so de- 
pendent for conveyance may be stolen. 

Water in this region is exceedingly scarce. There is a large tank near the village, 
to which all living within a mile of it resort. The water is muddy and in other cir- 
cumstances unfit to drink. No one could read in this village. Indeed the people of 
this region are less intelligent and civilized than farther south. 


Manufacture of Cutch. 6. — We passed through the wretched hamlet of Por Karm, 
and reached a stream of water about three miles farther on. All the morning, moun- 
tain spurs were on either side of us. By the bank of this stream, a few Burmese were 
encamped for the purpose of making cutch. The cutch-tree is very abundant. It is 
exceedingly thorny, and a great nuisance to the travellers in narrow jungle roads. 


5 
oM 
# 


1870.] Trip from Toungoo to Monai. 5 


The tree is cut down and chopped into small pieces. These are put into large earthen 
pots with water. The pots are placed over fires, made in small holes, dug in the 
ground. By the action of the heat and the water a gum exudes from the wood which 
is prepared for use. Only one of these men could read, but all were curious to hear 
the new law. 

During the afternoon we had a long and difficult march, sometimes over rocky hills, 
and sometimes following the beds of streams. It is a desolate region, visited by few 
except travellers to and from the Shan country. We arrived at Koogyee, a miserable 
village without zayat or any accommodation. Here there was a guard station last 
year; but it is dispensed with now, as the war is over. We spread our beds and ar- 
ranged ourselves in a cleared place of jungle under some small trees. 

The head man proffered us the use of his house, but it was too small and filthy to be 
taken. 

7. — Never is the rest of Sabbath more welcome than to the weary traveller. With 
friendly villagers around us, with tolerably comfortable quarters, we have been much 
refreshed. The people have listened well, and the few who could read received 
books. 


Scenery — The Danoo Country. 8.— During the night we had a shower, which 
was rather uncomfortable, as we had no roof above our heads. This morning we en- 
tered the great mountain pass which nature has made into the more eastern possessions 
of the Burmese King. On either side precipitous cliffs loomed up hundreds of feet 
high. Some immense convulsion of nature must have rent asunder this great chasm. 
A river runs through the deep ravine. On either side and in the bed of it are enor- 
mous boulders, washed by the water into picturesque shapes. Hot springs sent up 
their volumes of vapor. The effect of the scene was delightful. The wonderful 
precipices, the trees in the blended light and shadow of morning, and the voiceful 
river combined to put our hearts in a joyful mood. We ascended the mountain 
range, and descended a little, to the small Danoo village of Layhan. We encamped 
by series of pretty cascades, under the shadow of beautiful trees. The villagers 
turned out to see us, and some listened with interest to an account of the Eternal 
God. 
We have now left the Burman country and entered the Danoo country, which is a 
‘ long strip of territory between the first two ranges of mountains. It is Burman in 
everything, except that the people dress like the Shans. They are however a distinct 
race by themselves. During the afternoon we continued to ascend the mountains. 

It had been dark more than an hour, when we arrived at the village of Nam Kone. 
It was too late for any to visit us except the guard of the place, who came to ascertain 
our character, greatly fearing that we were thieves. We are now on the great 
Pwaylah plain. This is not a dead level, but a beautifully undulating champaign. 
Here the apple-tree and the raspberry-bush greet our eyes. Some of the fruit of the 
latter is ripe. 

9.—A brisk march brought us to Pwaylah town, situated among picturesque hills. 
No less than eight clusters of pagodas crown the summits. Among them the Mway- 
Dan is widely celebrated and attracts devotees of Buddh from every quarter. The 
people were more indisposed to listen than last year. A few only gave a little atten- 
tion. Near the city we saw a caravan of bullocks, loaded with the wood by which the 
priests’ garments are dyed yellow. Many of the bullocks had a single log on either 
side. 


Toungthoo Agriculture. — Our afternoon march was over a treeless plain. Villages 
were scattered in every direction, but we reached only two, as the others were remote 

‘ from the road. This region is inhabited by Toungthoos, a people numerous in this part 
of the country. Their method of fertilizing the land is very curious. Before plant- 


on 
t 


6 Trip from Toungoo to Monai. [January, 


ing, the fields are dug up with a hoe. Little hills of earth are heaped up in regular 
lines, the space between the hills being about four feet. In these hills of earth, wood 
and dung are burned together. Without this process the crops are very scanty. 
The fields present a curious appearance when the work has been done. This process 
of fertilizing the soil is extensively adopted in many parts of Shan land. Slept ina 
floorless zayat near a little Toungthoo village. The night was very cold. The days 
also have been very perceptibly cooler, since we crossed the mountains at Layhan. 

10.— We soon put the remainder of the plain behind us and reached the moun- 
tains. They are rocky in many places, and the ascents somewhat difficult. By noon 
we had crossed them and reached the broad Nyoung-yua valley. It looked beauti- 
fully with its many villages and net-work of streams. ‘The plain is difficult to cross, 
because the streams are deep, and the plain in many places a soft mud. In about an 
hour and a half we reached the city. Immediately a crowd of people gathered, and 
remained until darkness and a heavy shower dispersed them. We found abundant 
opportunity for preaching and the distribution of books. One man avowed his rejec- 
tion of Gaudama, but knew not whom to worship. 


Visit to the Chief. — Towards evening we paid a visit to the chief ruler. He is not 
the same person who was in power last year. This man is uncle of the reigning ‘Tsau- 
bwa who is absent now at Mandelay, where he has gone to present a white elephant 
to the King. He was very affable. His wife and her attendants were present at the 
interview. Water was served us in a beautifully chased silver bowl. The reception 
room was ornamented with guns, dahs and other tokens of rank. At night he politely 
sent us a guard, when we stated that we thought it unnecessary. He said that there 
could then be no cause of annoyance to us. 

Under the influence of Burman rule for ages and from contact with the adjacent 
Burman territory, Nyoung-yua has become Burmanized. Of late years Burmese is 
taught principally in the kyoungs. Both the Shan and Burmese languages are 
spoken. This border province is more thoroughly Burman than any other Shan 
state. It is on the outer edge of the great Shan territory. 


Cave Full of Idols. 11.—The Tsaubwa’s uncle sent us two men to guard us. 
He alleged that there was danger from robbers. Two roads lead from Nyoung-yua 
towards Monai. The one through the Tsaubwaship of Ho Pong is more direct. The 
other leads through the Tsaubwaship of Nam Koke. In Ho Pong there had been a 
civil war, and therefore at his urgent request we took the Nam Koke road which I 
travelled last year. We crossed the mountains and arrived at Kyouk-Tang. Here 
the people were afraid of us, and only a few ventured to visit us. After arriving here, 
I determined to visit Ho Pong, notwithstanding its unsettled state. Turning there- 
fore from the Nam Koke road we went northward. Near the road was a cave, used 
as a place of worship. At the entrance were about forty pagodas, of small size. A 
flight of broad steps led up to the entrance, on one side of which was a row of pagodas 
rising one above another. The cave was filled with images of Gaudama. The cave 
is in an immense rock rising out of the plain, with almost perpendicular sides. With 
the collection of pagodas it presented a very picturesque appearance. 

At Kome Pow, a mixed Shan and Toungthoo village, we found a new kyoung and 
zayat. The people were very curious to see us. Few could read Shan, as Toungthoo 
is taught in the kyoungs of this region. The night was intensely cold, and we could 
not keep warm. The Madras man who is our cook was greatly affected by the chilly 
air, never having experienced anything like it before. 


Civil Disturbance. 12.— As we left. Kome Pow, we became entangled in the mud 
of paddy fields ; extricating ourselves with difficulty and leaving many marks of honor- — 
able contact with mother earth, we regained the main road. There were few villages, 


| 
4 
as 
Ae 
é 
we 


1870.] Trip from Toungoo to Monai. 7 


and the country presented a barren aspect, especially after we entered the Tsaubwa- 
ship of High Loong. The town of High Loong lay at the base of the mountains on our 
right hand. We were not more than two hours and a half in crossing this petty prin- 
cipality. When we approached the boundary between High Loong and Ho Pong, we 
found large numbers of Shans living in temporary houses, having fled from Ho Pong on 
account of the trouble there. These people were very friendly, and advised us to 
avoid entering Ho Pong. We passed on however, and reached Ho Pong city by 
noon. It was soon evident that the better class of the people had departed. Most of 
the houses were closed, and few people remained. The city was fortified in rude 
fashion. A palisade of bamboo, inside of which was a trough of bamboo filled with 
earth, constituted the formidable defense. 

The cause of the civil war was the rivalry of two brothers, each of whom wished to 
become Tsaubwa. Two months ago they and their partisans fought. A Burman 
officer was sent from Mandelay to quell the disturbance. The younger brother and 
his adherents fled southward into the neighboring state of High Loong, while the elder 
brother went to Ava to urge his claims upon the king. The Burman officer however 
has not succeeded in establishing his authority outside of the city. Hence bands of 
robbers have frequented the mountains beyond. I visited the Burman ruler and was 
well received. He frankly expressed his inability to reduce the country to order for 
the present. 

The city of Ho Pong is prettily situated on an undulating part of the plain. It has 
several collections of pagodas, one of which is very handsome. Bricked causeways 
lead out from it. The spirit of the people remaining here was not candid. They 
wished only to cavil. Some of them were relatives of one of the Christians in 
Toungoo and had heard of the law of God. Their chief excuse for rejecting it was, 
that they could never believe in a God whom they could not see. The very men- 
tion of the name of Christ was offensive to them. 

We left this city and went eastward to a Shan village called Ho-man-sopoo, at the 
foot of the mountains. Beyond this village the people had entirely fled from their 
homes. Here a part remained. They were very much interested in the truth, and 
showed a marked contrast to the people of the city. 


Irrigation. 13.— To-day’s march has been very slow and tedious. The moun- 
' tains are not lofty, but are composed of a succession of broken spurs. We met a long 
train of men bearing the annual tribute of the Tsaubwa of Keng Toong to the King. 
The men were fine-looking, athletic people. Each one had a little red flag attached 
to his baskets, the sign that he was carrying royal goods. We passed several guard 
stations, at one of which we breakfasted. We saw no village all day, until we were 
near the city of Meng Pan. Reaching the plain in which the city stands, we crossed 
the river and arrived at our zayat just as the sun was setting. As we were crossing 
the plain, we saw the machinery in operation by which water is raised from the river 
and poured upon the paddy fields. Dams are built, so that only a narrow opening is 
left for the water to pass through. An immense water-wheel is placed in one of these 
openings. Pieces of bamboo matting are so placed in the wheel that the force of the 
current striking against them causes the wheel to revolve. On either side of the 
wheel, hollow bamboos are arranged obliquely, so that they take up the water, carry 


it over and pour it into troughs which convey it to the proper compartments of the 


field, 
[To be continued.] 


BURMAH. 
PAission to Shans. 


Lerrer FROM Mr. CusHING. 


Shan Visitors. Rangoon, Aug. 7, 1869. 
— I receive visits from Shans constantly, 
especially worship days at Shway Dagon, 
which is very near. Some listen well, but 
very many are unwilling even to listen a 
little. Burmans will generally argue ; 
but when a Shan does not want to hear, 
nothing can provoke him into an argu- 
ment. J regard them as more determin- 
edly bigoted than the Burmese even, and 
they are bigoted enough. 

Among these visitors are several from 
that part of Yunnan where Shans cease 
to be found, and the pure Chinese begin. 
One day’s journey from the homes of these 
people, there are only Chinese. These 
Shans speak, with a few idiomatic differ- 
ences, the same language which I study. 
At the same time they speak Chinese. 
The long pigtail is worn by them. Their 
clothes are much thicker than any used 
by Shans whom I have visited. They 
have snow in their country, and recog- 
nized it in some stereoscopic views which 
I showed them. 

These people are under Chinese rule, 
and never saw any Burmese until after 
they started on their pilgrimage to Shway 
Dagon and reached Shan States trib- 
utary to Burmah. They are very inter 
esting, though they are less civilized than 
their more Southern brethren. One 
company who visited us, lived in the 
vicinity of the Kakhyens, where Capt. 
Sladen, the English envoy, had so much 
trouble. They knew of all the circum- 
stances attending the burning of some 
Kakhyen houses, and the consequent ex- 
actions to which he had to submit. 


‘Extent of their Population. The 
Shans cover an extensive territory. Start- 
ing from the Gulf of Siam, they stretch 
north into Yunnan, and bend around al- 
most to Assam. The chief line of divis- 
ion between them is the northern bound- 
ary of Zimmay. The Siamese and Shans 
i 


Mission to Karens : — Letter from Mr. Bunker. 


LETTERS FROM THE MISSIONS. 


(January, 


of Zimmay are one branch, and all north of 
them another branch. At the foundation 
the languages are the same, though con- 
siderably variant now. The Siamese are 
related to the northern Shans as I have 
hinted, and doubtless possess many quali- 
ties in common. If so, I can well under- 
stand why, humanly speaking, the prog- 
ress has been so slow. Humanly speak- 
ing there is not a harder field to labor in 
than among this excessively bigoted race. 


_ to Rarens 
Lerrer Mr. BUNKER. 


Choice Day— Red Karen Convert. 
Toungoo, July 12, 1869. — Sabbath before 
last was a most precious day to us. The 
church in town sat down to the Lord’s 
table with the scholars who were disciples. 
There were a number of applicants for 
baptism, but none were deemed worthy of 
acceptance. Ithink we must tighten 
the cords in this matter also. Is there dan- 
ger of being too strict in the reception of 
members ? 

I have four genuine Red Karens in 
school. One has been with me since my 
return from their country, and is a more 
than ordinary man. He seems to be pow- 
erfully wrought upon by the Holy Spirit. 
None can tell how anxious we feel for his 
conversion. I think he has already found 
the “ pearl.” If God in great goodness 
gives him to us, behold the first fruits of 
the 200,000 Red Karens. As I behold the 
conduct and spirit of this young man from 
day to day, the song of praise to God is 
all ready to break from my lips. May God 
give us this occasion of praise ! 


God pouring out His Spirit. God is 
pouring out His Spirit in the northern 
parts of the field, and there seems to be a 
general movement among the heathen 
and others to resume the worship of God, 
and turn from their worthless customs. 
I have before me now four urgent applica- 


‘3 
et 


1870.] 


tions for preachers from four different 
villages in that region, which I am unable 
tofill as yet. One of our most promising 
young men recently died in that district, 
just as he had reached the village which 
had called him to be itsteacher. A strange 
providence, but the great Head of the 
Church cannot err, and we are silent 
before Him. I also hear good reports from 
different parts of the field on the south. 
The heathen are beginning to be shaken, 
andI should not be surprised to see a 
united movement among them in favor of 
the gospel, any day. 

How fast you are moving at home ; my 
head almost reels as I try to comprehend 
the rapid changesin our land. It seems to 
me that there never was a time of such 
religious activity as now. How must the 
captains and generals of God’s host rejoice, 
when they meet to talk of their conquest 
through Jesus. What a treat it would be 
for us to enjoy a little of your soul-food 
once in a while. Now we are all alone, 
and you can scarcely be surprised when 
I tell you that our eyes sometimes look 
longingly to the west. But the last few 
days we have been looking to the east, 
sighting along the unbroken line of the 
Pacific Railroad, and we find we can see 
Boston a good deal plainer than when 
looking to the west. What a glorious 
achievement is that, and how important to 
the interests of the cause we love. 

May God speed the coming of Christ’s 
kingdom. 


PAlssion to Burmans, 


Lerrer From Miss GAGE. 


Usefulness in Bassein. Bassein, Sept. 
12, 1869. — It was indeed a great disap- 
pointment to my hopes, and a sad trial, to 
leave Toungoo just as I felt that I was 
getting hold of my work.1_ And, had there 
been any one I could have looked to, to 
take the general oversight and charge of 
the mission, I should have stayed and gone 
on with my school; but I felt that the 
whole charge was more than I was equal 

1 During the abserfce of Mr. and Mrs. Bixby 


from Toungoo, Miss Gage, whose work is at 
that station, has temporarily gone to Bassein, 


Mission to Burmans : — Letter from Miss Gage. 


9 


to. The way looked very dark to me for 
a little while. Grief at parting with my 
dear pupils, anxiety for them and the 
disciples who were to be left with no one to 
care for them, was added to the feeling that 
I might possibly be mistaking the path of 
duty. 

But it was not long before the sweet 
assurance came that the Lord would di- 
rect my ways, and I have had no doubt, 
since I canee to Bassein, that it was His 
own guiding hand which brought me here. 
I little anticipated the sad, crushing blow 
which was to fall upon the mission. 
When I arrived, Mr. Douglass was already 
stricken with the fatal fever, and it was 
my privilege for the next ten or twelve 
days to relieve Mrs. Douglass a little 
of the heavy pressure of care and labor 
which was resting upon her. It was also 
my privilege to witness the last closing 
scene ; to see how Jesus can soften the 
dying bed, and shed light upon the dark 
valley. I shall not soon forget the ex- 
pression of his countenance nor the tone of 
his voice as he exclaimed, when first 
aware that the hand of death was on him, 
“If this be death, where is its sting?” 
And then the sweet talk of Jesus which 
followed, and the words of tender counsel 
and exhortation, closing so appropriately 
with a prayer and the benediction in Bur- 
mese ! His work was done, and well might 
he turn his weary head upon the pillow 
and sleep, — sleep to waken in the Sav- 
iour’s presence ! 

Mrs. Douglass has been and is still 
wonderfully supported under her double 
bereavement. Sometimes, it is true, she 
almost longs to go and join her husband 
and child in their heavenly home. But 
when the wants of the poor heathen come 
before her, she is willing for their sakes to 
labor on in loneliness for a few years 
longer. 


Burman School and Field of Labor at 
Bassein. Mr. Douglass’ school, which was 
closed during his illness, was opened again 
soon after his death. Most of the old 
scholars returned, and some new ones en- 
tered ; so that we now have a school num- 
bering over fifty, who are very regular in 
their daily attendance. We almost shrink 


10 


from the responsibilty of such a school, 
with no more experienced heads than 
ourselves ; but the Lord has helped us 
every day in that asin other things. 

There is a vast field of labor here among 
the Burmans, and to short-sighted human 
vision it seems so strange that the strong 
laborer, thoroughly fitted for his work, 
should have been snatched away. But 
we know that it is the Lord’s work, dearer 
to Him than it can be to us, apd while we 
cannot understand the reason of His deal- 
ings, we must seek to bow in meek sub- 
mission to His will. 


Looking back to Toungoo. I am very 
pleasantly situated here, and happy in the 
work which is given me todo. Still my 
heart clings to the dear lambs left at 
Toungoo, and I trust that it may be the 
Lord’s will that we shall return there, 
and gather many of them into the fold of 
the Good Shepherd. 


Lerrek FRoM Mrs. INGALLS. 


The Cause at Henthada. Aug. 14, 1869. 
— I am in the mission house at Henthada, 
and am happy to report that the Great 
Shepherd has cared for His sheep, and 
they give evidence that they have been 
fed from yreen pastures. 

I am pleased with all I hear and see. 
The news of Mr. Douglass’ death had just 
reached them, and many earnest prayers 
are going up to God for our afflicted sis- 
ter. 

They have heard that a new missionary 
is designated to Henthada, and thanks- 
giving and prayer are being offered for 
him. In the prayers last night, they re- 
membered the American churches, and 
prayed that God would bless the fathers 
and mothers, and the children and chil- 
dren’s children. ‘ We love them all,” 
said ong; and another said, “In heaven 
we shall know them at once, and we will 
all speak the same language ;” and then 
one of our youth struck up, 

“ Never part no more,”’ etc. 

It was not a formal meeting; but if it 
had been, our Methodist brethren would 
have been at home with us. The seed-sow- 


Mission to Burmans : — Letter from Mrs. Ingalls. 


(January, 


ing time at Henthada has not been wasted 
time ; for we see the bursting forth in all 
who call upon us. One believes that the 
Eternal God is the one true God, but can- 
not accept salvation through Christ yet ; 
another, God and the way of salvation 
is clear but they cannot keep the Sabbath 
yet; and one accepts all, but is trying to 
reach heaven without baptism ; and an- 
other cannot bear the scorn of friends ; 
and thus the seed has germinated in many 
of these hearts. 


The Out-stations — Missionary anticipat- 
ed. I have good reports from the out-sta- 
tions ; but I have so many places to visit 
in our Thongzai field, that I cannot go to 
all these places as I did last season ; and 
besides, I know this station, with its post- 
office, steam*communication and market, 
will command teachers, while our jungle 
people and jungle life may not; and so 
I must spend my best strength there. 
Miss Adams is giving hers to the educa- 
tional department. 

The Karens have been with me all the 
morning. They are smiling through their 
tears. One of the men whom I knew when 
Mr. Thomas was here, held my hand and 
the “ tears trickled” down his cheek as he 
spoke the name of his teacher ‘Thomas, 
and my heart trembled for the future 
teacher. But the Karen brother saw the 
hand of the Lord in all that had been 
done, and before my fears were formed 
into words, he continued, “ I loved teacher 
Smith, too ; but the Lord had other work 
for him,” and he wiped the trickling tears. 
“ Now the Lord is sending teacher Rand; 
God be thanked, we will surely love him 
too.” And then followed questions of age, 
andy looks, qualifications, etc., and then, 
another brother arriving at that moment, 
it was not “ Are you well,” but, “ God is 
sending usa teacher. His name is Rand, 
and he will be just like teacher Thomas, 
and teacher Smith. Our Father knows 
who is the right one. Praise the Lord.” 

O, that br. Rand could have seen such 
a scene, as he bade adieu to his friends 
and home. He too would have smiled 
through his tears. 

The Karens are pleased with the letters 
from the Committee. I too, rejoice with 


= 
Lt 
» 
‘ ° 
3 
™ 


these people ; for’I know these new 
helpers, and I shall have faith to pray for 
others whom I know, and who gave me a 
half promise. 

The heathen are wicked, and the Christ- 
ians far from the scale of perfection ; but 
the light poured into one soul is more than 
enough to pay us for all these trials, and 
I can truly say, “ Blessed are they who 
can hear and respond to the Macedonian 
ery.” 


Efforts for Shans. Rangoon, Sept. 18, 
1869. — This is a time of great joy to me. 
You know that for years I have been 
specially interested in the Shans, and 
every effort in their behalf has been to 
me a cause of great thanksgiving. But 
to-day my joy is full and almost complete ; 
for I am, for the first time, in the home of 
a Shan missionary. I have seen their 
halt-finished manuscripts and some of 
their printed books, and to-day Mr. Cush- 
ing gave me the pleasure of presenting to 
a heathen Shan the first copy of the 
“Golden Balance” which he brought 
from the press. The man promised to 
read it, and when I took his hand he as- 
sured me that he hoped he should be a 
Christian. He is with Mr. Cushing, and 
with his faithful efforts, I have no doubt 
that he will soon come to Christ. 

Iwish you could have spent the even- 
ing with us; we went down into their base- 
ment chapel room after the service, and 
there my new “ Orrery and Tellurium” 
were brought out ; and the explanations 
given to acompany of Shans, in their own 
language, by Mrs. Cushing. it is the first 
effort of the kind which has been made for 
this people, and O that you could have 
rested your eye upon that company of 
interested Shans, preachers, colporteurs, 
teachers and school children, It was a 
cause of great joy to me to witness the 
wonderful acquirements of Mr. and Mrs. 
Cushing, in this language. All our terms 
seemed to be so well put into Shan, that 
these people had no trouble in under- 
standing the most complicated explana- 
tions, 

The Shan Mission seems to rest upon 
a good foundation, and I hope it will be 
sustained by prayer, men and means. If 


Mission to Burmans: ~ 


Letter from Miss Adams. 11 


I had not this great Burman work on my 
hands, I should be strongly tempted to 
join Mrs. Cushing in her labors for the 
women and children. 


Labors on the River Banks. I have 
been at work among our river people, and 
have made my way down to Rangoon, 
after an absence of one year. It is a 
great rest forme. We return in a few 
days, working among other villages on 
our way, back. We have a company of 
candidates for baptism, and others are not 
far from the kingdom. 

Satan has many strongholds still; but 
the Lord has some strong ones, and with 
His power we have nothing to fear. 
Hold us up by your prayers. Yes, bear 
us up before the Hearer and Answerer of 
all prayer, and in the name of Jesus 
Christ we shall be heard, and these 
heathen saved. 

Death has made many changes, but our 
brethren have been called by the Master 
and our loss is their gain..) 


LETTER FROM Miss ADAMS. 


Petition for a School. Thongzai, Aug. 
16, 1869. — About this time last year I 
told you that an old priest sent for me to 


come and wind his clock.1 This year 
another company from the same village 
came for me, begging me to come to their 
village, but now on quite a different er- 
rand, Their request was that I should 
come and establish a school in their vil- 
lage. They had often urged Mrs, Ingalls 
to come to their village and talk to them, 
but she had had other and more pressing 
claims, and was at this time in Henthada. 
I found it impossible to refuse, though it 
was a long distance and yery muddy. 
Before the sun was up the next morn- 
ing, I was on my way to the little school. 
I found a few children gathered, and 
many of the parents waiting for me at the 
teacher’s house ; but most of the people 
were out in the rice fields, so that I did 
not meet a fourth of the villagers. As 
many as I found at their houses, I visited, 


’ 1$ee Mag. for March, 1869, p. 74. 


12 Mission to Assam : — Letter from Mr. Stoddard. 


Fission to Assam. 


and talked with them about the school, 
and with but one exception found all not 
only willing, but very glad, to have their 
children in our school. There is hope of 
a flourishing school for boys and girls 
there. 

In these jungle villages the farmers who 
have rice fields, leave their homes in the 
rainy season and live in a little hut in the 
fields during the four months of planting 
the rice. As most of the people in the 
jungle are farmers, the girls are not at 
liberty, during the rains ; for they are the 
rice-planters. The few who were now 
gathered I examined, and gave the 
teacher instructions about Bible teaching, 
and our plan of study and quarterly ex- 
aminations, etc. 


Many Inquirers. I found a great 
number of inquirers, who had been led to 
think of this religion by a woman who 
last year placed her son in our school to 
spite her sister. But God used her wrath 
to praise Him ; for by her constant com- 
ing to look after her child, she listened to 
the truth and became an earnest inquirer, 
and is now, we have every reason to be- 
lieve, a changed woman, bearing witness 
to the truth and power of God’s word 
everywhere and at all times. 

Just before I left, a half-grown boy 
came up to me, smiling as if he wanted me 
to speak to him. I gave him a book to 
read, and asked him if he went to school. 
He said he had left the priest’s school. I 
asked him, which one. He said, the one 
to which I went to wind the clock. I 
asked him if he had finished his education 
in the monastery. He said he had ; but 
if I would establish a school there, he 
would study more. 


The School for Burman Girls. Our 
dear Saviour is guiding us into new fields 
of usefulness every day, and giving us 
strength for every new duty. Our school 
in this place is prospering. I have very 
interesting classes in needle-work, paint- 
ing and drawing. I feel assured that 
your prayers and those of many dear 


friends at home are answered in our be- 
half. 


(January, 


LETTER FROM{MR. STopDARD. 


Arrival of Mrs. Stoddard. Gowalpara, 
Sept. 4, 1869.— The last mail brought 
the glad news of the safe arrival of Mrs, 
Stoddard and our son at New York. A 
passage of 120 days of unusual storms and 
perils ; but out of them all the Lord de- 
livered them, and blessed be His holy 
name. How good the Lord has been to 
me in this. I wish to serve Him better in 
the future than I have in the past. 


Another Garo Convert. August and 
September are always trying months in 
Assam. I feel a good deal the debilitating 
effects of this season of the year. But in 
a few weeks the thermometer will drop a 
little below 90°, for a few hours at night, 
at least. 

An intelligent Garo sepoy, who can 
read and write well in the Assamese, is 
now on a visit to his friends in this vicin- 
ity. His company is stationed at Dibur- 
gor, Upper Assam, to which he will re- 
turn in a few weeks. During his absence 
of several years, many of his friends have 
become Christians in this district. He 
has made me several visits, spending some 
days at a time. I was greatly delighted 
to find him inquiring after the truth, and 
finally gained evidence that he was a 
child of grace. He is now at the Chris- 
tian village of Rajasimala, and Omed 
writes me that he has been received into 
the church and baptized. And thus may 
the salvation of the Lord run and fill all 
minds. 


Peace in Death. Another aged Garo 
Christian has recently died at Amyonga. 
He was the father of a large, grown up 
family, several of whom I baptized in 
February, 1868, with himself. He died 
as the Christian woman referred to in my 
last, happy and at peace, calling upon the 
name of the Lord Jesus. 

Omed and Ramkhe, son-in-law to the 
deceased, and several other Christians 
from the surrounding villages, arrived 
shortly before his death. They desired 
to give their elder brother and father a 


Chr 
B 

beit 

bro 
ac 

Sw 

bet 
tar 
rez 

of 

tra 
ge 
as 
ev 
of 
sic 
tr 
ke 
by 

T 
al 
le 

t 
’ 

t 

I 

| 


1870.] 


Christian burial, as was given to the 
Christian woman a month before. 

But the heathen relatives and friends 
being numerous, the body of our Christian 
brother was burned. This is by no means 
a criminal custom of Garos. Some bury 
and some burn their dead. 


Southern China Mission. 
Lerrer From Mr. ASHMORE. 


Chinese Assistants — Chinese Postage. 
Swatow, Aug. 15, 1869.—I have just 
been looking over the letters of the assis- 
tants, and it has occurred to me that the 
reader might get more of an inside view 
of the work by my sending a few literal 
translations of them as they came. We 
get a batch of these letters every week, 
as each assistant is expected to write 
every Monday, giving some brief account 
of the previous week’s work, and of the 
condition of the church members, who are 
sick, and who are absent, and who are in 
trouble, ete. Postal communication is 
kept up between all important places, not 
by government, but by private enterprise. 
The postman, when kis business will 
warrant, goes himself to and fro on the 
passage boats, and when he lands goes 
about from house to house, delivering his 
letters and collecting his postage. ‘Twenty 
cash, or about two cents, is the usual 
postage. The writer of the letter, after 
putting on the address, adds with his own 
pen that on delivering the letter the post- 
man should be presented with twenty 
cash for the purchase of a sip of wine or a 
cup of tea, —a delicate way of glossing 
over the mercantile aspect of the transac- 
tion. 


Reports from Native Assistants. 

A respectful statement made to the 
teacher : — 

On the 3d day of the 6th month, which 
was the Sabbath, there were in, to hear 
the truth, of outside persons, some ten or 
more. Among these was the respected 
senior Seng Lok. Also there were present 
Teng Hwang Hnia and Teng Phio ; and 
the teacher surnamed Go. The disciple 


[referring to himself] preached to them 


Southern China Mission : — Letter from Mr. Ashmore. 


18 


from the xvii. of Acts from the 24th verse 
to the 31st. After that, br. Chang Lim 
spoke from 1 Cor. xv: 51-57. In the 
afternoon, the senior Seng Lok again 
met with the brethren to worship the God 
of heaven. A few persons came and 
heard and a few tracts were given away. 
In the evening Seng Lok came again to 
hear the truth. The next morning after 
worship br. Chang Lim started out to 
visit Hai Snua, in compliance with your 
suggestion. 

We all send our salutation to Mr. and 
Mrs. Teacher. 

This is from Chang Ngwan Ya, for 
himself and Chang Lim. 


A respectful statement : — 

On the 26th day of the moon, after 
bidding good-by to the teacher, the un- 
worthy servant [referring to himself ] 
came back to Te Ine. That same after- 
noon, some four or five persons came in 
and heard the doctrine of Jesus. 

On the 27th there called at the chapel 
the following persons. The senior Chu, 
the senior Tang, the senior Achong, the 
elder brother Huk Tau [baptized last 
communion] also M:-— Su, Acho, Chang 
Hue, Sie Si, A Ho, Peng Hnia, Snia 
Hnia, and a few others whose names I 
did not know, with all of whom I talked 
about the truth. 

28. [Another list of names like the 
above, but nothing special. ] 

29. [Some ten names reported as visit- 
ors. 

The 1st of the new moon, [Similar to 
the above. ] 

2. [Similar to the above. } 

3. Sunday. This forenoon there were 
not many persons assembled, not exceed- 
ing twenty. The younger brother [re- 
ferring to himself] preached from Heb. 
12: 4. After the regular service was over, 
more people assembled and another ser- 
vice immediately followed. [Nothing is 
said about the evening in this letter.] 

Another matter must be communicated 
to the teacher. Our brother Su Meng, 
the Doctor, is in trouble. You may know 
he is the head man of a sedan-chair guild. 
Some twelve different sedan-chair stands 
are more or less under him. Now it has 
been the custom here that when the local 


14 Southern China Mission : — Letter from Mr. Ashmore.  [January, 


mandarin wishes to employ sedan-chairs, 
he gets them at a reduced rate, as he pays 
but about four hundred cash a day [about 
forty cents], while the common people 
may have to pay as high as seven hun- 
dred cash. But this reduction is made 
only to chief magistrates of this city. 
And mandarins from other places passing 
through here are not willingly carried at 
any rates differing from those of the com- 
mon people. A few days ago the General 
of the forces came here with his officers 
from the Hucity. He is on his way down 
with a body of soldiers to punish the 
rebellious villages of the Hai Sai district. 
Wishing for chairs and porters, he sent a 
messenger with some sixty dollars to Su 
Meng, asking him to furnish the sedans, 
etc. Su Meng called the chief men of 
the twelve shops together, and appor- 
tioned the money among them each for 
his quota. On the second day of the 
moon the General wished to start, and 
called for the chairs ; but the chair bear- 
ers refused to go for less than the usual 
rates, and ran away and hid themselves. 
Thereupon Su Meng and the heads of the 
twelve shops were all arrested and thrown 
into prison by the General. The friends 
of the imprisoned made an appeal to some 
of the city elders, begging them to go be- 
fore the city magistrate and intercede for 
the release of the arrested. The elder 
appealed to complied, and represented to 
the magistrate that since heaven and 
earth had been spread out, there never 
had been heard of such a thing as man- 
darins from distant places claiming the 
same reduced rates of travel as might be 
conceded to the home mandarin. The 
magistrate heard them through, and said 
that when the General returned from his 
campaign [in two or three weeks], he 
would then see what could be done for 
their release. 

This letter is from Hai Bien, who makes 
respectful salutation. 


For the information of the pastor: — 

On the fifth of the moon your unworthy 
servant went down to Tang O, to preach 
the truth. In the afternoon I went to 
Limke and preached the Lord’s doctrine 
to a few persons who were willing to hear, 
and then went on to Goke and again 


spoke. At this last place there listened to 
the truth, of men and women, some thirty 
persons. At about nine o'clock in the 
evening, went to the house of Chu Lai 
Ho [an applicant for baptism], and outside 
there collected between fifty and sixty 
persons, men and women. The opportu- 
nity to preach and talk about the doctrine 
was improved, and it was about midnight 
when all had dispersed. The next’ morn- 
ing I came back to the chapel by a road 
which was about ten li [a little over 
three miles] in length. The seventh of 
the moon was the day of rest. At eleven 
o'clock, preached at the chapel from John 
3: 16-22. Of men and women hearers, 
there were in all about thirty. Chu Lai 
Hnia from Tang O, came over and 
brought three or four friends: with him. 
There were some present whose faves 
appeared as if they were about to believe, 
and some from Tang O wished the teacher 
would come and see them. 

This letter is from Po Sai, of the sur- 
name Ung. 


The writer of this and the following 
letter, are both connected with Mr. John- 
son’s stations. 


To the teacher, for his information : — 

On the 22d day of the moon, being also 
Friday, after having received the instruc- 
tions you had for me, I crossed over to 
Swatow. But it was now too late for the 
passage boats, and I remained over night. 
Very early the next morning, I started by 
boat for Ampo, and having reached there 
I started on foot over to Bue Koir which 
I reached in time for the boat to the city. 
By three o’clock I arrived at the chapel. 

The 24th was the Sabbath. There as- 
sembled in the forenoon some fourteen 
or fifteen persons, who listened to the 
truth. The ignorant one [referring to 
himself] preached from John 4: 7-26 
[Christ’s conversation with the woman of 
Samaria]. In the afternoon the service 
was held as usual. 


This letter is from Go Tie Pe. 


Tie Pe had just been down to Swatow, 
and wrote the letter above on Monday 
morning, so that his week’s labor has not 
yet been reported. 


th 

at 

lu 

} la 
li 

t! 


1870.) 


Chong Chi Hnia says: On the 8th of 
the 6th month I went to the village of Ow- 
kwa. There are two persons there of 
whom I have hope. Quite a long time 
ago when 1 was at that village, I visited a 
lumber yard and preached the doctrine. 
Many persons were working there, but all 
laughed at me save two carpenters, who 
listened attentively, but said nothing. 
Five or six times in succession I visited 
the shop, making known the truth by one 
or two verses at a time, lest I should say 
too much and their minds would be con- 
fused. These men both said it was won- 
derful and was worthy of belief. After 
this they left the lumber yard temporarily, 
in order to assist another contractor who 
was pushed for help. When in the new 
place, they were much ridiculed for listen- 
ing to the name of Jesus, and they lost 
heart and became ashamed. When that 
job was finished, they came back to the 
old place to work. It was there I again 
found them out, and comforted and 
strengthened their faith by the words of 
Jesus. Now they say they will no more 
be ashamed of the doctrine. 


Subsequent to all this I went Pu 
Sua, preaching as I went. There lives 


here a man named Pu Sin Hnia. On 
the 3d day of the 6th moon he was in 
Tang Leng, the day of the communion, 
and came himself to the chapel to make 
inquiry. So afterwards I concluded to 
visit his village. I found him, but his 
faith is weak and cannot bear much. 

Hwa Sai, another person, lives about 
two po ko li distant from our own home. 
In former days when I was engaged in 
the old business (making and selling 
ground-nut oil), he used to visit my father 
who had just become a disciple, and he 
used to listen to hear my father pray. 
But his faith was weak. When he met 
the world he was ashamed, although he 
did always seem glad when he met any of 
the brethren. For a long time we had 
no hope of him; but not a great while ago 
he came and inquired for me when I was 
absent from home. ‘* What did he want?” 
I asked them. “ We don’t know,” the 
household replied. “ What did he ask 
about ?” “ He asked when the Loi pai 
Tang people would have their next com- 


Mission to Teloogoos : — Letter from Mr. Clough. 


munion.” ‘Was that alll?” “ Yes.” 
And soI think now he has made up his 
mind, but we shall see. I have talked 
with him often and hope more than ever. 

There is another man, an old man 
named Kok Pe. [used to go to his village 
to collect oil bills. One day when the 
persons I sought were not at home, I sat 
down under his shade tree, and began to 
read some of the holy writings. He asked 
me, ‘* What is that book you are read- 
ing?” So I told him it was a book that 
contained many new and wonderful things. 
“ What things?” he asked. And then I 
told him that idols were no gods at all, 
and Sau Ta (the general designation of 
all idolatrous divinities) could not help 
themselves, if they fell into the fire, to get 
out of it. And then I told ofthe true 
God, and of His grace in sending Christ 
to redeem us all from hell. There was 
another old man with him, and we talked 
till very late in the night, and they both 
said this was very pleasant to hear and 
very wonderful. The other man’s name 
was Cho Pe. He has recently joined the 
church of the brethren at Tam Chan 
[the Presbyterian Mission], and now old 
Kok Pe, who is sixty years of age, wants 
to come out at the next communion in the 
8th month and unite with us, , 

These are the only ones of whom I have 
more or less hope. Others come and 
hear and make inquiries, but whether the 
truth goes down into their hearts, or only 
enters their ears, we do not know. 


INDIA.— MADRAS PRESIDENCY. 


HAission to the Teloogoos. 


LETTER FROM Mr. CLouGH. 


Ministers’ Institute at Ongole. Ongole, 
Aug. 6, 1869. —I have been very busy ; 
the day is hardly commenced before it is 
night, and yet I suppose that each is of 
the proper length. From the first of May 
until the middle of June, while the hot 
winds were blowing, we had a “ Ministers’ 
Institute” as near like those now held at 
the West.as our circumstances would ad- 
mit. All the native preachers, colpor- 


t 
1 | 
| 


16 


teurs, etc, were in attendance, making, 
with the more advanced scholars in the 
normal school, quite an audience, — fifteen 
or twenty. Excellent men, brn. Jewett 
and Timpany, were invited to lecture be- 
fore the “ Institute; ” but as they failed 
to come, I, in my poor way, lectured to 
these earnest listeners nearly every day.) 
The lectures were taken down, or rathei 
notes of the lectures were taken by the 
preachers, etc. The lectures over, each 
one went his way to write out as much of 
what he had heard as possible. This done, 
they by themselves met and compared 
papers, and again made out a report of 
the morning lecture, which was submitted 
to me, re-corrected, and then transcribed 
into a blank book. In this way they got 
the lectures almost in full, which gives 
them quite a book, ready for reference. 


Fifty Candidates for Baptism. Last 
Sabbath, Aug. Ist, was another time long 
to be remembered by us. Just fifty were 


present for baptism ; some of these were 
from Cumbum, Ravypawd, one of the 
suburbs of the city of Cumbum, where 
there are said to be thirty other believers 


in Jesus. Twelve were from Sookasul, a 
town of eight or ten thousand inhabitants, 
twenty miles north of Cumbum, being 
nearly a hundred miles from Ongole. The 
candidates for baptism were of all ages, 
from the youth of fourteen or fifteen years 
of age to the old and decrepit whose so- 
journ here below is nearly at an end. In 
the afternoon I immersed forty-two, on 
profession of faith in Jesus. A little Pente- 
cost it was. The ordinance was adminis- 
tered in our new baptistery, which we had 
just completed. The baptistery is not in 
the chapel as is customary at home, but 
about a hundred yards distant, under a 
beautiful tamarind-tree. 

I need not remark that the forty-two 
were thoroughly examined ; besides, either 
myself or the native preachers have known 
most of them, and more or less of their 
walk for months. The eight whom we 
did not receive are Christians, I think; 
but are entangled in marriage affairs. 
They may make everything right, and yet 
be numbered with the people of God. 

The whole scene, the place, the con- 


Mission to Germany : — Letterjfrom Mr. Unger. 


anuary, 


verts, the evening, the thus dedicating the 
new baptistery, the soul-cheering news 
from many villages and the many other en- 
couraging signs of good in store for the — as 
most people think — God-forsaken Hindus, 
made us greatly rejoice, and gave us a fore- 
taste of the happinessin store for those who 
love Jesus, when all enemies shall have 
been conquered and He shall reign King 
of earth, as He is King of heaven. 

An hour after the baptism, we again all 
repaired to the chapel and partook of the 
Lord’s Supper. This was over, as usual, 
about nine o’clock; a hymn was sung, and 
then, did we goout? No; the disciples did 
not want to. They wanted to hear from 
me more. ‘hen commenced a general 
talk of the trials, difficulties, temptations, 
abuse, beatings, perhaps, — and perhaps 
worse, (several have been beaten, and at 
one time sixteen were in jail one hundred 
miles northwest of Ongole, because they 
were Christians,) and the way they must 
meet all such trials. 

At 11} o’clock I took leave and went 
to my cot to try to sleep, and they to their 
mats to sleep until daylight next morning, 
whemall, except the preachers, colporteurs, 
etc., went on their way to their homes. 

“‘ This is the Lord’s doing ; it is marvel- 
ous in our eyes.” 


PAission to Germany. 
- Lerrer FRoM Mr. UNGER. 


Stations in Southern Russia. South of 
Russia, Einlage, Jan. 7, 1869.—JIn ac- 
cordance with your request for detailed in- 
formation regarding the progress of the 
work of the Lord among the baptized 
Christians in Southern Russia, I herewith 
supply you with the same, at the same time 
asking your prayers and those of our 
brethren on our behalf. Our Union in 
Southern Russia is composed of three 
churches. 

1. The church in Einlage, in the 
government district of Texatherinoslaw, 
numbering 185 members. 

2. The church on the Molaschna, in the 
Taurus government district, numbering 
170 members. © 


4 
3 
; 
ped 


1870.] 


3. The church on the Kuban in the 
Caucasian territory, numbering 180 
members. Besides this, there is a small 
band of twenty believers in Old Dantzig 
in the government district of Cherson. 

1. The church at Einlage in the 
government district of Texatherinoslaw, 
with 185 members, one elder, two preach- 
ers, and four deacons, was formed in the 
year 1862. The formation of this church 
was the result of the conviction come to 
by us, and obtained, next to the light re- 
ceived in the word of God, through our 
correspondence with br. Oncken of Ham- 
burg, and through reading the “ Missions- 
blatt,” that the baptism of believers is the 
only Scriptural baptism. This church has 
three preaching stations. 1. The station 
Kinlage. 2. The station Tschernoglas. 
8. The station Markusland. At Ein- 
lage the meetings are conducted by br. 
Unger, who is the elder; in Tschernoglas 
by br. F. Beck ; in Markusland, where 
the greater part of the members live, the 
services are conducted by br. Aron Lepp 
and Peter Friesen. On Sunday morning 
sermons are delivered by some in the Low 
German tongue. In the afternoon we 
have free conversational exposition of the 
Scriptures, in which all take a part, or if 
strangers are present addresses are given. 
On Wednesday evening a prayer-meeting 
is held. Every first Sabbath in the month 
the members assemble very numerously in 
Einlage, when the Lord’s Supper is cele- 
brated, and candidates for baptism, when 
there are such, baptized. Until now we 
have only seldom had love feasts. For 
the mission not much has hitherto been 
done. When a missionary tour is to be 
made, a collection is made for the purpose. 
One colporteur is supported by the 
churches, who circulates Bibles, Testa- 
ments, tracts and other religious books. 
In this way 600 Bibles and Testaments 
and 3,000 tracts were circulated in the 
year 1868. The poor and such as need 
pecuniary help we have always among us, 
and, in addition to this, the church in 
Kuban had to suffer from a failure of their 
crops. For the alleviation of their need 
the church here sent 150 roubles. A 
church seal we have not yet got, but 
intend soon to procure one with ¢he in- 
VOL, L. 2 


Mission to Germany : — Letter from Mr. Unger. 


17 


scription: “seal of the Brudergemeinde 
(church of brethren ) in Einlage.” 

2. The church on the Molaschna, in 
the Taurean government district, with 170 
members. Elder, Hinrich Hiibert. Preach- 
ers, J. Janzen and J. Fash. The members 
live far apart in various villages, which 
renders the guidance of this church diffi- 
cult. As far as practicable, their services 
are held in the same way as at Einlage. 
There is in this church also a Young 
Men's Association, who make it their ob- 
ject to distribute tracts and labor for the 
promotion of the truth generally. These 
youths meet once in the month for con- 
sultation and united study of the word of 
God. Their leader is P. Friesen, in New 
Halbstadt. 

3. ‘Ihe church on the Kuban, in the 
Caucasus territory, with 180 members. 
This church is composed of members who 
have emigrated from Einlage and Mo- 
laschna. The imperial government have 
given them land where they now are, 
but notwithstanding which gift they are 
temporarily poor. They have not yet 
an elder. “Their preacher is Christian 
Schmidt, and there are two deacons. 
Many matters still require regulating here. 


Other Believers in Russia. Besides the 
churches above named, there are about 
twenty baptized believers in Alt Dantzig, 
nearly 240 wersts distant from Einlage. 
Two months ago I made a missionary 
journey to Alt Dantzig, and found the 
brethren in disunion. By the grace of 
God we succeeded in restoring peace 
among them. Several earnest children of 
God there are convinced they ought to be 
baptized. But owing to the severe frost 
at that time, no one would venture to be 
immersed. A brother who could under- 
take the guidance of the church in Alt 
Dantzig is greatly needed, and under the 
care of a devoted pastor the church would 
soon be in a flourishing condition. To 
our joy we learned that in the neighboring 
village of Kalocvka, there are twenty-five 
believing Russian men and women, who 
read the New Testament, and who have 
seen into the idolatry of the Greek church 
and have left it. Although subjected to 
annoyance and persecution by the ecclesi- 


. 


18 Mission to Germany: —Letter from Mr. Oncken. [January, 


i 


astical and civil authorities, they do not 
enter a Greek church, but assemble in 
their houses, read the word of God, pray 
and sing Russian hymns, their attention 
having first been directed to these things 
by bro. Pritzkau, who is now in Hamburg. 
These Russian friends were twice present 
at our meetings during my stay in Alt 
Dantzig. It was touching to behold how 
they wept while we were partaking of the 
Lord’s Supper, and most earnestly they 
entreated us to send them a brother who 
would further instruct them in the Divine 
truths, and baptize them and administer 
the Lord’s Supper to them also. 

We were also told of eighteen Russian 
believers in the village of Lubomirka, ten 
wersts from here, who have been eonverted 
‘through the reading of New Testaments, 
with which they were supplied by one of 
our brethren, who is a miller in the place. 
Truly here also the field is white unto 
harvest. Let us pray that the Lord may 
send laborers into the field. 


Toleration in Russia. During the last 
few years greater toleration ‘is exercised 
in Russia in religious matters, but we are 
far from having perfect religious liberty. 
Our colporteur, W. Rigel, some weeks 
ago visited the German colonists in 
Marienwoler, and visited many families. 
In the colony of Wickeron he baptized a 
believing couple. But no sooner was this 
known than he was denounced to the 
authorities, treated very rudely by the 
chief functionary and sent as a prisoner to 
Stanawoi. But on the way there our 
brother and his guards had to stay over- 
night in a Roman Catholic colony. The 
schoolmaster of this place, a worthy man, 
undertook the guarantee for br. Rigel, 
and took him into his house, where a num- 
ber of inquisitive people soon gathered, to 
whom br. R. gave an address, the school- 
master himself giving out the hymn. After 
that br. R. was kept by the Stanawoi, a 
Russian functionary, for two weeks in a 
miserable prison, and then transported as 
a prisoner to the circuit town Alexan- 
drowsk, a distance of 120 wersts. Here he 
has for a sufficient guarantee, been set at 
liberty, until the investigation of his case 
is ended. 


Nore sy Mr. ONCKEN. 


Baptists in a Hebrew Colony. Bro. 
Pritzkau from Russia, who is at present 
in Hamburg passing through a course of 
instruction preparatory to missionary la- 
bor, and will, D. V., return to Russia in 
the summer, adds, that in the neighbor- 
hood of the colony Alt Dantzig, which is 
his home, are still three stations where 
there are Baptists who are connected 
with those in Alt Dantzig. 

In Lynbominski, ten German miles 
from Alt Dantzig, are nine Baptists, who 
together with some other believers have 
there hired about 2,000 acres of land. 
These believers agree with our principles, 
but as there is no Baptist preacher there, 
they have not yet had an opportunity of 
being baptized. In ‘Tsraelowka, a He- 
brew colony, are ten or twelve German 
families (among them six Baptists,) who 
have received some land from the em- 
peror, that they may be a pattern to 
the Jews, and the latter may learn good 
farming from the Germans. Of such col 
onies, which are only inhabited by Israel- 
ites, there are a great many, especially in 
Southern Russia ; but in all these colonies 
are some Germans, appointed by the em- 
peror to be a pattern to the Jews. 


Baptists in Turkey. Ten Baptists still 
reside in Neu Dantzig, twenty-five Ger- 
man miles distant from Alt Dantzig, who 
remained of those who were banished in 
the years 1865 and 1866. During those 
years about ten families were banished 
from their country, and others left it of 
their own accord, because it was impossi- 
ble for them to live as believers in Russia. 
All these went to Turkey, and settled not 
far from the Russian boundary near 
Tulscha in Catalni, where there are a few 
German colonies. Among these Germans, 
who had formerly not led a life in God, a 
great revival took place through the per- 
secuted Russian emigrants, and they are 
now all, under br. Liebig’s guidance, 
Baptists. 

— 


LETTER FROM Mr. ONCKEN. 


Twenty-nine Converts Baptized. lt 
Dantzig, Oct. 12, 1869.— Here the Lord 


4 
ae 
i 
ie 


1870.) Mission to Germany : — Letter. from Mr. Kalweit. 19 


has worked miracles of grace. Twenty- 
nine dear simple children of God have 
been baptized and received into the church. 
Two Elders have been appointed. Two 
other highly esteemed brethren have been 
chosen to the office of deacons. My ad- 
dresses at various times were listened to 
with great earnestness, not only by the 
people of this village, but by many stran- 
gers from a distance. Everything has 
gone off very well, and we have had the 
Lord’s richest blessing with us, so that my 
cup has overflowed with joy. 


Collision with the Police. On last 
Lord’s day afternoon a small cloud arose 
in our hitherto untroubled horizon; the 
Stanawoi, one of the upper police officials 
from the town of Elizabethgrad, made his 
appearance in Alt Dantzig. I was sum- 
moned to the Schulz (overseer) of the 
village, where the above named personage 
awaited me and demanded to see my pass- 
port. Half an hour elapsed before it was 
returned to me, after every attempt on 
my part to explain what kind of a state 
Hamburg and what the German Confed- 
eration (Bund) are, had proved fruitless. 
As this dignitary in rich official garments 
maintained a smile while my explanations 
were being made, I concluded the whole 
affair to be at an end. But I was greatly 
mistaken; for when on Monday br. Pritz- 
kau and I with our baggage, had already 
entered the railway carriage which was to 
take us to Krementschuk, the Stanawoi 
again made his appearance and bade us 
get out of the carriage again. We had 
then to repair to the police bureau, where 
we were kept waiting a full hour in an 
antechamber, where five writers seemed 
much more intent upon their smoking than 
upon their work, No chair was offered us, 
and at length the chief was pleased to ad- 
mit us. After he had addressed several 
questions to br. Pritzkau regarding my 
object in coming to Russia, we were dis. 
missed with the injunction to come back 
at five o’clock. Already at half past four 
o’clock we were at our post, but waited in 
vain until six, when we were conducted 
by a lad, the youngest of the writers, to 
the private dwelling-house of the chief. 
But he was not at home. The next morn- 


ing (this morning) we once more repaired 
to the police bureau, and were so fortu- 
nate as to be admitted soon. My pass- 
port was now returned to me with the in- 
junction to present it at the police office of 
every Russian town I might go to. What 
is intended by this I do not know; but the 
whole affair has cost me two days and has 
led to an altered route. 


Favorable Prospects. The prospects 
for the foundation of churches on the mod- 
el of the Apostles’ churches, that is, con- 
sisting of baptized believers, among the 
German colonists in Southern Russia are 
truly promising, and I dare not lightly va- 
cate the field. To-morrow morning we ac- 
cordingly leave for Neu Dantzig, forty 
miles from here, where there are many 
believers, and among them not a few who 
are convinced of the scripturalness of be- 
lievers’ baptism. Our caravan will prob- 
ably consist of three wagons. On the way 
to Neu Dantzig, three days’ journey, we 
are to pass each night at the houses of 
brethren. Ifthe Lord protects me, great 


things may be accomplished at Neu Dant- 


zig. Do not have any fears on my ac- 
count. I am in good and precious and 
mighty hands, and so long as the Lord Je- 
sus has work for me to do, I am immortal 
and secure, in spite of all my enemies. 
Only pray for me that child-like trust may 
be given me, and grace with all joy to 
declare the whole counsel of God unto sal- 
vation. From Alt Dantzig we go to Ein- 
lage, where a Baptist church already ex- 
ists, — and from thence I proceed to Tur- 
key. 
—~— 


LETTER FROM Mr. KALWEIT. 


German Emigrants to Caucasus. Tif- 
lis, July 22, 1869.— Nearly seven years 
have elapsed since I had the earnest de- 
sire of giving you some news about our lit- 
tle band here in Caucasus. Itis just seven 
years ago since we, twelve persons in 
number, left our native country, Poland 
for this part of the globe; eight of these 
remained in Odessa and thus only four 
of us arrived in Tiflis on Sept. 9, 1862. 
We there met two wealthy families, our 
relatives, and a brother who is a soldier, 


a 


20 


and it is he who is writing this letter. 
Our relatives received us weary ones, worn 
out and fatigued by a journey of nearly 
400 German miles. They were taken 
aback on our very first entrance, because 
they saw we had not much of this world’s 
goods; and, although they were well off, 
we could not remain long with them, as 
we had to pay for our lodgings, notwith- 
standing the many unoccupied rooms they 
had. We had soon scarcely any money 
left, and could find no work; for our 
friends lived eight miles distant from Tif- 
lis, behind the high mountains, in the vil- 
lage of B. 

After a year had passed, we went to 
Tiflis; but things did not look much more 
promising there. Provisions were dear 
and we knew nobody; and although the 
earnings are good for the inhabitants and 
such as are well known, and the provisions 
compared to the earnings are not expen- 
sive, yet ours was a very pitiable condi- 
tion. No brethren within reach, no mis- 
sionary paper attainable, it seemed to us 
almost as if there were no longer a God in 
heaven. 

But “ He who dwelleth in the secret 
place of the Most High shall abide under 
the shadow of the Almighty.” (Psalm 91.) 
For He has said, “I will not leave thee 
nor forsake thee.” And He keeps His 
word, for He is faithful. His promises 
are yea and amen. How often have we 
experienced it, — thus also in our journey 
to Odessa, He was nigh unto us with His 
help. For when we had no more money 
to continue our route, our church brethren 
gave us fifty roubles. May the Lord re. 
ward them for this, here and in eternity. 

It is a wonder to us how even opposers 
must serve God’s people. We received 
through the above named soldier, the 
“ Missionsblatt ” of 1866, and we also got 
the “Zionsbote” of 1868, by the court 
bookseller at St. Petersburg, Mr. Schmitz- 
dorff. These papers cost us six silver 
roubles annually. We are often delight- 
ed to find in them the names of dear 
brethren out of whose churches we are, 
Through these messengers we have con- 
stantly learned how actively the Lord’s 
people are progressing in the building up 
of His kingdom. But then we have had 


Mission to Germany : — Letter from Mr. Kalweit. 


|January, 


to lament. When will the time come 
that we also may venture to add our grains 
of sand to the rearing of the edifice; but 
our courage always failed us. Perhaps 
there may be some more scattered ones, 
who, like us, do not know how and 
through whom to send their mites to Ham. 
burg. Now, however, that the appeal for 
Spain and China has come to us, we can- 
not wait any longer, and venture in the 
name of the Lord to send our first lines to 
Hamburg. May Jehovah's angels bear 
them safely and speedily thither. 


Movement in Russia. Learning from 
br. Biischlin’s letter (the brother who is 
appointed to China), that br. Oncken is 
sojourning in Russia, we beseech of the 
Lord, as we have often done, that we 
might have the joy of seeing you (br. One- 
ken) face to face, and we therefore would 
beg of you also to visit Tiflis, the capital 
of Caucasus. There is a large colony of 
Germans from Wurtemburg here, as there 
are indeed many German colonists in all 
parts of Russia. The hearts of some are 
inclined towards us, and who knows what 
you may be enabled to do here for the 
kingdom of God. There are many revi- 
vals, even among the people of the Rus- 
sian tongue ; but because there are no la- 
borers for the harvest, they fall from one 
error into another. Nevertheless it seems 
that the darkness of midnight is passed, 
and the day begins to dawn. Yes, the 
Lord will do still greater things. - O that 
His children would often bow down be- 
fore Him in prayer, for He does not de- 
spise their supplications; as we sing in our 
“ Glaubens Stimme,” that when God’s chil- 
dren kneel around Him they draw down 
the Lord from heaven, yea, “ He shall re- 
deem Israel from all his iniquities,” when, 
as it is written, all saints shall ask it of 
Him at the appointed time. 


Russian Converts. At times it seemed 
as if we four stray sheep must perish here 
in the vast wilderness; but the Lord has 
kept us until now. He has not let the 
grain of wheat die, but has even caused it 
to bring forth fruit, although but little. 
In this year also the Lord has blessed us 
and added two souls unto us by holy bap- 


3 
= 
“3 
: 
4 


1870.J 


tism, so that at present we number eleven. 
The first of these is a man of forty-eight 
years, of the Russian tongue, who has 
been blind from his infancy; the other, a 
young man, aged nineteen, called T. F. 
Kielblock. The former was sent here to 
Caucasus from Russia in chains for the 
Lord's sake, has ltved here for fifteen 
years, and is now overjoyed to have found 
us. In his gladness he forgets all the 
past sufferings, the bondage and the long 
imprisonment, and sheds tears of joy in 
almost all our meetings. We mingle our 
tears of gratitude with his; for in him we 
have met with an experienced brother, 
who, though he is blind and never learned 
to read, knows almost the whole Bible by 
heart, and is often of great service to 
us by his words of encouragement and 
instruction, by which he gladdens our 
hearts. 


Worship in the Russian Language. As 
some of us know the Russian language and 
writing, the word of God is commented 
upon in our meetings in the German and 
Russian language; we also sing Russian 
hymns, using the tune-book of the ‘* Glau- 
bens Stimme,”— the hymn-book used 
throughout all the German Baptist church- 
es, — which are written by an anonymous 
poet, similar to our hymns. There are 
nearly fifty of these hymns, but not all can 
be used, as in many, infant baptism is still 
advocated. ‘These our songs are a source 
of great joy to our Russian brother, be- 
cause the beautiful tunes and words are so 
attractive. It might therefore add greatly 
to the furtherance of God’s kingdom if the 
whole “ Glaubens Stimme” and Spurgeon’s 
sermons could be translated into the Rus- 
sian language. Many Russians expressed 
the wish to have them at any cost, for 
there is no lack of money here. Trades- 
men earn good wages. 


Physical Abundance but Spiritual 


Dearth. During these latter two years, 
there has not only been no dearth in pro- 
visions, but they are cheaper than in for- 
mer years. The soil is still blessed by the 
Lord, like the promised land of old. The 
gardens and woods are laden with fruit; 
grapes and pomegranates we have in abun- 


Mission to Sweden : —Letter from Mr. Broady. 21 


dance; yet the people act like those of Sod- 
om and Gomorrah, Although the Lord 
and His apostles may have dwelt in these 
mountains 1800 years ago, at present it is 
a vast barren field of the dead, filled with 
dead bones. May all the children of God 
remember this also before the throne of 
grace, that the Spirit of God may be felt 
and these dead bones may be made to 
move and come to life. 

We commend ourselves inthe name of 
the friends here, to the prayers of all 
God’s children. 

Enclosed are seven roubles for the evan- 
eglization of Spain, and three for China. 


HAlssfon to Sweden. 
Letrer rrom Mr. Broapy. 


The Seminary at Stockholm. Stock- 
holm, Sept. 13, 1869.— Our Seminary 
held its commencement on the 9th of 
June. The average grade of scholarship 
manifested at the examination was not 
below that of last year. The studies pur- 
sued were the same as then, with the ex- 
ception of Hebrew and Physiology. The 
former had been excluded from the 
course ; the latter could not be pursued 
for lack of time. Ten students have been 
in attendance during the whole year. 
When the year began, eighteen were in 
attendance; but two had to leave when 
the appropriation was diminished last fall. 
Three, who were last year’s graduates, 
but whose course had been somewhat pro- 
longed, left in October. Two more left 
at the close of the first term; these two did 
not study for the ministry, and from the 
beginning did not intend to stay any 
longer; and one had to be dismissed dur- 
ing the second term, for want of a ca- 
pacity tostudy. These reductions broughé 
the number of scholars down to ten. Of ° 
these ten, three graduated at the last 
Commencement, and have already been 
assigned to their respective fields of labor. 


Former Graduates. The three who 
went out from us last summer, were brn. 
Lindblom, Wingren and Backman. Lind- 
blom was called to take charge of a weak 


1e 

8 

it 

d 

) 

r 

3 

| 

} 

} 

| 

| 


= 


22 Mission to Sweden: — Letter from Mr. Broady. 


and sinking church in the city of Eskil- 
stuna, an important manufacturing town. 
The church, having never been properly 
attended to, was getting to be a by-word 
in the mouths of the community. Br. 
Lindblom has, by the grace of God, suc- 
ceeded in getting it on its legs, and made 
it an object of respect and a source of 
spiritual good to-the community at large. 
But he did not think it his duty to stay 
with this church longer than a year. 
Consequently, after having witnessed its 
growth in grace, in number and in spir- 
itual strength, br. L. has now gone to 
take charge of the church in Orebro, a 
still more important field, which was left 
destitute through the death of our beloved 
and lamented Hamvall. 


Utility of Day Schools. Br. Wingren has 
settled in Kristianstad, one of the leading 
cities in the south of Sweden. Here an 
extensive field of usefulness is open before 
him. He is surrounded by a large num- 
ber of churches, almost all of which are 
destitute of pastors and of proper care and 
instruction. He is also nobly and faith- 
fully at work. Besides taking the direct 
care of the church in Kristianstad, he has 
set about inaugurating a system of day 
schools throughout his extensive district. 
He collected such members of the various 
churches, principally female members, as 
felt themselves called and willing to teach 
in these schools. These teachers he has 
put through a course of instruction suited 
to the present demand. He intends to 
repeat this course of instruction for teach- 
ers yearly, every time elevating somewhat 
its scope and character. 

This idea of day schools originated some 
years ago among the brethren in the north 
of Sweden, where these schools have 
proved a decided success, and been the 
means of much good to our cause. Br. 
W. seems to be just the man whom the 
Lord intends to use in starting this kind 
of work now in the south of Sweden, as 
he is by nature and education excellently 
adapted for it, and besides, during a pro- 
longed visit north last winter, he had an 
opportunity to learn thoroughly how it 
ought to be worked and managed. It is 
also already eagerly embraced by the 


(January, 


churches where he now is, and there js 
reason to hope, that by the blessing of God 
these schools will be the means of doing 
as much good in the south as they are 
doing in the north. 

And this kind of work will not likely 
stop here, but in proportion as we get 
men qualified to take tharge of it, it will 
probably spread until the whole land is 
caught under this at present apparently 
insignificant little school net. God is in 
this work ; and can we but get the chil- 
dren of the country under the influence 
of the Baptists and that of the gospel, 
then the field is won for Christ. 


Domestic Mission Work. Besides this 
enterprise, br. W. has also begun to or- 
ganize systematic mission efforts for the 
spread of the gospel throughout his part 
of the country;—a thing very much 
needed, because there are places in the 
south as dark and destitute as anywhere 
else. Until the arrival of br. Wingren, 
the southern churches had done nothing 
in this respect; but he just writes me that 
they are now fast awakening to the im- 
portance of this work, and that they in- 
tend soon to organize a regular missionary 
society. 


Feeble Church Strengthened. Br. Back- 
man has settled in Norrkoping, perhaps 
the principal manufacturing city in Swe- 
den. A small church has been in ex- 
istence here for some years past, but for 
want of proper care and training, it had 
accomplished little or nothing for Christ, 
and was near its dissolution. They have 
worshipped hitherto in a little, unseemly, 
out-of-the-way place, but have now re- 
ceived help to rent another hall, which is 
favorably located, and which will seat 
from five to six hundred people. Br. B. 
“feels hopeful that, by the blessing of God, 
the prospects for this little church will 
soon begin to brighten, as the people of 
the city can now be reached by the gos- 
pel, and as the Holy Spirit already seems 
to be working on the hearts of some of 
them. 


Disposal of the Graduating Class. Of 
the three brethren who graduated this 


“3 
= 
aq 


1870.] 


year, one, br. Patterson, has been called 
to fill the place vacated by br. Lindblom, 
in Eskilstuna. Another, br. Anderson, 
has been sent to superintend the work on 
the island of Gottland, in the Baltic Sea. 
Here we have several small churches, 
which have suffered terribly by false 
teachers, and by unfaithful and corrupt 
members. The third, br. Engstrom, has 
received a call to settle over one of our 
largest country churches, situated a few 
miles from Stockholm. As br. E.’s health 
is at present somewhat unsettled, he has 
not yet entered this new field of labor, 
but hopes to be able to do so by the be- 
ginning of October. Brn. Lindblom, 
Patterson, and Engstrom are mostly sup- 
ported by their respective churches; but 
the other three brethren are as yet wholly 
dependent on the mission for their sup- 
rt. 

I have thus given a brief view of the 
regular coursers, who have thus far gone 
out from the school. I have certain hopes 
that they all, by the grace and blessing of 
God, will prove faithtul, acceptable and 
successful laborers in the gospel. And so 
far as the effects of their labors have been 
felt, the benefit of the training they have 
received in the school is also beginning to 
be perceived and gratefully acknowledged. 


Vacation Labors. 


During the vacation 
the other students were, as usual, sent off 
to various parts of the country to preach, 


and none of them labored in vain, Some 
- met with greater success, others less ; but 
the Lord was with them all, and made 
them a blessing whithersoever they went. 
These labors in which the brethren engage 
during vacations are excellent every way. 
They return to their studies strengthened 
both in soul and body, and accompanied 
by the benedictions of the people they 
have served. Besides, their faith is en- 
larged, their experience inereased, and 
the love of Christ more precious to them 
than ever. As faith and love beget labor, 
80 it is also true that labor for Christ be- 
gets faith and love in turn. Blessed be 
God that it is so. 


The New Term — Fewness of Students. 
The school opened again Aug. 11th. Of 


Mission to Sweden : — Letter from Mr. Broady. 


23 


the new-comers, all are beneficiaries, 
studying for the ministry, and two of them 
are tried and experienced workmen of 
the Lord. At times I feel somewhat sad 
because we have not a larger number of 
students for the ministry, seeing that the 
need for such workmen is so very great. 
Yet there may be various causes for this. 
One is, that God has not seen fit as yet to 
give us any more. True there are some 
in the field who, no doubt, would be 
greatly benefitted by going through a 
course of study. But they themselves do 
not seem inclined to do so, and I, as well 
as my brethren generally, have not the 
heart to induce them to quit the field and 
their labors at present, as it could not but 
be injurious to the cause. Prejudices are 
no doubt as yet at work in keeping some 
away, who would otherwise, perhaps, 
readily avail themselves of our instructions 
and other advantages of the school; but 
still I cannot now look upon this as the 
only principal hindrance. There is an 
actual and a fearful dearth of men and la- 
borers among us. Even if we had the 
means, we could not get the men. Emi- 
gration has, of course, much to do with 
this state of things. It almost constantly 
takes away from us some of our best and 
most experienced gospel workmen, as 
well as some who would, no doubt, under 
God, become faithful servants of the 
churches of Christ. All this looks sad; 
but what can wedo? All isin the hands 
of an all-wise and merciful God; to Him 
do we look; He is our only hope. 


A Providential Arrangement. So far 
as the number of students in the school is 
concerned, the matter might also be looked 
at from another point of view. Suppose 
the Lord should send large numbers of 
scholars to the Seminary ; — whence, under 
present circumstances, would their support 
come when they should enter the field ? 
And would they not crowd out and devour 
the support of those who have not been 
through the school? This would very 
likely be the case, which, however, would 
not be wise at all, — as these uneducated 
laborers furnish a most indispensable ele- 
ment in our mission work. And when the 
educated had got into their hands all the 


| 


24 


means available, there would still be others 
of the same class left unsupported and 
drifting round at large, nobody knows 
how and whither, in a country like this. 
I am profoundly convinced of the wisdom 
and providence of God, that this school is 
His work, and that He will henceforth, 
as He has done hitherto, graciously fos- 
ter and enlarge it, and use it in the 
way Himself has decreed, so as to make 
it best subserve the interests of His 
heavenly kingdom among us. Pray for 
us. 


The Swedish Triennial Conference. 
The day after the Commencement, that 
is, June 10 ult., the Triennial Conference 
met with the First Church, and continued 
its meetings for three days. The delegates 
numbered sixty-four, and the meetings 
were well attended throughout. The re- 
ports from the churches were favorable. 
Certain portions of the land, such as Da- 
lerne and Skane, had experienced special 
outpourings of the Spirit of God since the 
last Conference, and souls by the hundred 
had been united with Christ. A great 
part of the time was taken up by the re- 
ports, and by speeches made by brethren 
from the more interesting parts of the 
field. The rest of the time was occupied 
by the discussion of various questions re- 
lating to the welfare of the churches, and 
the mission at large. Some efforts were 
made to awaken a greater interest in the 
subject of an educated ministry and in 
that of missions. But the time for organ- 
izing a general Missionary Society, seemed 
not yet to have come. The Conference 
plainly showed that we have yet a great 
work before us, ere our denomination, as 
a whole, comes to know what it is to labor 
systematically, to put forth genuine efforts, 
and to make true sacrifices for Christ and 
for the conversion of the world. Every- 
thing here is yet in its beginning; but 
time and’ grace will, under God, develop 
even us, and make us what we must be in 
Christ Jesus. The spirit of peace, love 
and codperation pervaded the whole, and 
the Conference ended as it had begun, 
with expressions of gratitude to God for 
favors received, and with earnest prayers 
for an increase of faith, for the outpouring 


Mission to Sweden : — Letter from Mr. Broady. 


([January, 


of the Holy Spirit and the coming of the 
kingdom of Christ. 


Ministers’ Institute — Associations. We 
expected last summer that things could 
have been so arranged that we might 
have held a Ministers’ Institute, some- 
where, even this year, similar to that of 
last year. This, however, has not been 
the case. We could not find a way open 
for us this summer. One thing or another 
turned up to prevent it. But we have 
better hopes for next summer, be it the 
Lord’s will, as br. Wingren has been re- 
quested, and kindly and gratefully con- 
sented, to prepare the way for us in Kris- 
tianstad. 

Prevented from holding the Institute, 1 
visited instead, in company with brn. Truvé 
and Lindblom, some of the associational 
meetings which were held immediately 
after the Triennial Conference. In deing 
this I passed through Koping, Arboga, 
Asker, and Leunés, in all of which places 
we have Baptist churches, among whom I 
had the privilege of holding forth the 
word of life. 

Westmanlands Association met in the 
city of Arboga. The attendance was 
good and the presence of the Holy Spirit 
was plainly felt. The distinguishing fea-- 
ture of the meetings here, was the efforts 
put forth to re-awaken an interest in the 
Sabbath-school work. This branch of the 
Lord’s service had for some time suffered 
neglect in this Association, but the breth- 
ren were encouraged earnestly to go to 
work again and recover lost ground. 
The great need felt here, as in most other 
Associations, was faithful and _ efficient 
pastors and teachers. The Association 
consists of nine churches, 1 think, but 
they have only one pastor, and he, as yet, 
young and inexperienced. Of the con- 
sequences of such a state of things, the 
reader can easily judge. 


Stockholm Association, 1 left Arboga 
for Asker, where Nerike Association met 
this year. This Association is one of the 
strongest in Sweden, containing between 
thirty and forty churches, and presents 
some of the best features of the work of 
our denomination in this country. We 


= 
( 
1 
a 


1870.] 


have two more Associations, Stockholm and 
Sundvall, which in number of churches 
can cope with this. Of the three, Stock- 
holm Association is probably the strongest 
materially, but the least developed. Its 
ore of iron and copper and silver and gold 
lies yet buried and unused, waiting for 
the man, or men, who under God shall dig 
it out and invest it with exchangeable 
value. In Nerike Association, on the 
other hand, we meet with some of the best 
pastors and elders we have. And then 
some of the churches have already begun 
to learn how good it is to do a little for 
the support of their own laborers. The 
mission work is on its legs; Sunday-schools 
are cherished, and day schools, in some 
places, adopted. Prayer, faith, consecra- 
tion are at work, and the Spirit of God 
Jeads the whole. It was pleasant to be 
with them, and all separated in love, re- 
joicing and glorifying God. 


The Cause in Stockholm. The few re- 
maining weeks of vacation, as there was 
nobody else to take my place in the 
chapel, I spent at home. I preached also 
in the morning occasionally in our new 
hall in the south of the city. The con- 
gregations in the chapel, having as usual 
been somewhat thinner during the sum- 
mer months, are again beginning to fill 
up. The Holy Spirit is also graciously 
vouchsafed to us. A few days ago, a soul 
found peace in believing. Last Lord’s 
day at the communion I was permitted to 
receive into the church five other souls, 
who had been baptized a* few days previ- 
ously. Their experiences dated back 
longer or shorter periods. 


Religious Liberty ~ Persecution. The 
principles of religious liberty are gaining 
ground more and more. Now we are 
permitted to hold our public services at 
any hour during the day; formerly we 
were forbidden to do so during the hours 
the state church worshipped. Yet the 
flames of persecution still occasionally 
burst forth. A few days ago our eldest 
preacher in Dalarne, a truly esteemed 
and worthy brother, was fined seventy- 
five dollars an a charge brought against 
him by a coterie of state priests, only be- 


Mission to Sweden: — Letter from Mr. Broady. 


25 


cause he had administered baptism and 
the Lord’s Supper. But this malignity 
will only serve as fuel for the fire which 
will eventually consume the very state 
church itself, and purge the country of all 
its abominations and iniquities. Notwith-. 
standing persecution, the good work still 
progresses, although it be slowly. The 
hand of God is in it. He is with us. 


The Opening Fields. When I think of 
the field and the work, my heart feels 
like crying, moved by gratitude as well as 
by sadness, — gratitude, because the Lord 
is so good, merciful and patient with us, 
with His blessings of grace, owning us and 
our work as His; grateful also, because 
He permits me, so unskillful, weak and 
unworthy, to labor in this part of His 
vineyard; but sad, on account of the 
great want of laborers, — a want so much 
the more deeply felt as the harvest is so 
open, so ripe and inviting. 


Prospects in Norway and Finland. 
And not only in Sweden, but in Norway 
and Finland, the case is the same. These 
three fields might be considered as one, 
their characteristics being, so far as I 
know, the same. I know of no fields 
where earnest and faithful efforts to win 
souls yield, under God, larger returns. 
A few days ago I conversed with a Nor- 
wegian sea-captain, a member of an evan- 
gelical Separatist church in Tromso, who 
stated that there are Christians in Nor- 
way, convinced of the truth of baptism, 
who belong to his church and to other 
churches of the same character. These 
would, no doubt, soon form Baptist 
churches, had we but proper laborers to 
sem among them. 

In Finland, the first known baptism 
of a believer took place but a short time 
ago. The candidate was an old Christian, 
and br. Heikel administered the ordi- 
nance. The baptized is a prominent man 
among the children of God there, and just 
the man the friends think will become an 
apostle and servant among them. I can- 


not but hope that this may be so; and in 
that case, lo, what a glorious prospect for 
the gospel will then be opened, even in 
barbarous Finland, 


26 


Pray for us, that the Lord may be 
pleased to pour out His Holy Spirit over 
us, and raise up among us a host of men, 
clothed in the mantle of Elias, to go forth 
and take possession of this inviting 
northern world for Christ. 


LETTER FROM Mr. EDGREN. 


The Work at Upsala. Arvika, Sweden, 
Aug. 5, 1869.— At Upsala I experienced 
much of the presence of God. He truly 
blessed my stay there, and it seemed hard 
to leave that field. This spring, the 
church began with eleven members, and 
when I left, it was twice that number. 
The church was before, on account of its 
impure doctrines, a shame to our cause 
and a stumbling-block; but has now 
gained general confidence as an evangeli- 
cal church. We had hearers of ail classes, 
sometimes young men who studied in the 
University, and there was quite a move- 
ment among the “dry bones.” 1 baptized 
three, formerly Lutheran Christians, and 
one professed to have found the Saviour, 
just before I left. 

One case is remarkable. In one meet- 
ing, I think a Friday meeting which we 
held in common with Christians of all de- 
nominations, a brother requested prayer 
in behalf of his brother, who had lost his 
reason on account of a deep feeling of his 


Miscellany : — Letter from Mr. H. Gutsche. 


(January, 


lost condition, and had been taken to the 
insane asylum. It was my privilege to 
see that man shortly afterwards coming u 
to our services together with his brother, 
and praising God for perfect deliverance 
both from insanity and from his sins. He 
is a wonder to those who know him in the 
city ; a glorious monument of the precious 
grace of God. 


Successor of Mr. Edgren. Now a dear 
brother Ostergren, a brother with, I think, 
correct views, an humble and devout 
mind, and zeal for the kingdom of Christ, 
has taken my place. If he sees it to be 
the will of God, he intends to stay. He 
is a graduate of college, and will, I trust, 
mingle with the young students of Upsala. 
At Upsala the national life pulsates. Our 
mission must be well represented there, 
and our principles will be infused into the 
nation. It is the-very worst place to have 
a poor or, as in years before, an erroneous 
representation of Bible principles and 
doctrines, as held by us. I am anxious 
that he may be supported there, or else 
some one who could at least equally well 
fill the place. The church at Stockholm 
misses him and wants him back ; but there 
are enough at Stockholm without him. 

Some beams of gospel light are pene- 
trating into Finland. May they penetrate 
the darkness eastward, until they meet 
China’s morning light. 


MISCELLANY. 


GERMAN BAPTISTS IN SOUTH AFRICA. 
LETTER FROM Mr. H. GurTscne. 


On the 28th of February we enjoyed 
at Keis Kamma Hoeck such a feast day 
as these mountains of Caffraria never 
saw. Seven souls whom the Lord had 
made willing to break with the world 
now and forever, desired to join the army 
of Christ’s soldiers and to put on their 
uniform. At two o'clock, Pp. M., a multi- 
tude assembled on the banks of the Keis 
Kamma, not far from the station of the 
English Episcopal mission. Soldiers from 
the neighboring port and many persons 


from the station, both German and Eng- 
lish, were present.! Even Hottentots 
and Caffres also stood together in groups, 
waiting to witness the ordinance of bap- 
tism. Many came only out of curiosity or 
for the purpose of disturbance. A young 


1 Eight Missionary Societies, having twenty- 
six stations and about 44 missionaries, labor 
among the natives in the extensive field 
throughout the extent of which the German 
population is found. This evinces how scat- 
tered are the brethren, and how large is the 
field of labor, and how tedious and difficult the 
journeys of the missionary over the pathless 
mountains and deserts of South Africa must 
be. ° 


I 

oF 


1870.] 


pioneer of the Christian army, the Presi- 
dent of the Young Men’s Christian Asso- 
ciation, while the candidates were dressing 
distributed tracts on baptism among the 
spectators. Thus even before the sermon 
he scattered the heavenly seed and di- 
verted the attention of the people away 
from frivolous conversation to the one 
thing needful. There was a solemn si- 
lence when the pastor, surrounded by the 
seven candidates, after a brief but earnest 
hymn, spoke on the words, “ Buried with 
Christ by baptism unto death.” There 
was no interruption. The crowd were 
quiet and attentive. All was still as on a 
Sabbath morning in the chamber of 
prayer. Nosound was heard but the 
murmuring of the water and the gentle 
rustling of the trees. It seemed as if the 
very foliage was saying — “* Peace be with 
you. The voice of the Lord is in the 
trees. The Lord is at hand.” They went 
down into the river, which had worn a bed 
for itself perhaps twenty feet deep, while 
the choir on the shore sang a hymn. The 
first was an aged man with hoary hairs; 
he had outlived two generations of men; 
now he rejoiced to obey with filial trust 
the command of Christ, and thus to tread 
in the footsteps of his Elder Brother. To 
such a heart no commands are burden- 
some. The joy that beamed from his 
eyes was mirrored in the eyes of him with 
whom, hand in hand, he went down into 
the watery grave. It was his son, a full 
grown man and the father of a family. 
Then followed a married couple. In 
short, it was an occasion over which the 
angels might sing. In dripping garments 
a few words of exhortation were spoken, 
a hymn was sung, and the multitude sep- 
arated into little companies, to talk over 
what they had seen and heard. The 
tearful eyes of the Caffres during the re- 
marks at the water, showed that under 
their dark skin they have human hearts, 
capable of being pierced by the sword of 
God’s truth. Some of the brethren had 
previously explained to them, partly in 
Dutch, partly in Caffre, the meaning of 
the ordinance. Now they were surprised 
to find even in their own Bibles, which 
they brought for proofs, that there was 
written, immersion, burial, and rising 


| Miscellany: — The Secret of a Speaker's Power. 


27 


again, going down into che water and 


coming up out of the water. Not a few 
Caffres, both here and elsewhere, are not 
satisfied with their sprinkling, after having 
witnessed baptism by us, and give their 
missionaries much trouble. 

A chapel called Ebenezer chapel has 
been dedicated in Hanover. We recog- 
nize here the principle that the people of 
God know and keep the Master’s word — 
“Owe no man anything.” Hence we do 
not consecrate a chapel to the service of 
God, until the last penny is paid. 

Tiyo Soga, a native who has received 
a good education, is now engaged upon a 
translation of “ Pilgrim’s Progress.” The 
book will be read: much by the Caffres 
and with great pleasure. 


THE SECRET OF A SPEAKER'S POWER. 
By Rev. Dr. Dean, BANGKOK, SIAM. 


Where is the promise of His coming ? 
The disciples were to wait in Jerusalem 
during ten days for the promised power 
which came at Pentecost. They tarried to 
good purpose, because it was in obedience 
to command, and in the exercise of prayer. 
Idle waiting is worthless in results, The 
ploughman who folds his arms in seed- 
time, “ shall beg in harvest and have noth- 
ing.” The workman who idly waits for 
his wages, deserves what he receives, 
emptiness and poverty. The builder who 
stands inactive on the foundation of his 
edifice, rejoicing in its firmness and hold- 
ing in his hands the beautiful plan of 
architectural skill, will never see his 
house completed. He may eloquently 
discourse to the passers by of the beauty of 
the model and the grandeur of the build- 
ing, but the walls will never go up with- 
out work, 

The beauty of any plan depends greatly 
upon its practicability. The eloquence 
of an oration depends on its truthfulness 
and adaptation to time and place, and its 
practical bearings on the persons ad- 
dressed. A man with the fascination of 
the sweetest voice, and the flourish of the 
most captivating rhetoric, may not stir 
the hearts and move the hands of his 


u 


28 Miscellany : — Women in India. 


hearers, unless he brings to them some 
practical, appreciable truth. He may 
discourse to men with the tongue of an 
angel about the inhabitants of the moon, 
and still affect the people of the moon, as 
much as he does the inhabitants of the 
earth. Words must be understood, must 
be true, and have some connection with 
the parties addressed, to become eloquent. 
What gives sublimity to the seraphic 
visions and glorious predictions of ancient 
prophets, if not their fulfilment? Take 
away the truthfulness of their before-say- 
ings, and we have but the vagaries of dis- 
quieted dreamers. The sublimity of Isa- 
iah’s predictions of the Messiah’s coming 
and glory is found in their fulfilment. 
Had the promised Messiah never come, 
and the prophet proved deceptive, we 
should read his predictions with disgust, 
added to the disappointment. Where do 
we go for the profoundest thoughts that 
ever filled the human mind, but to Jesus 
of Nazareth? First to His words, where 
the sublimity of thought is surpassed only 
by the simplicity of diction, — but next 
and chiefly, to His actions. Christ’s words 
were such as never man spake ; but if we 
dared to imagine that they could be sep- 
arated from truth, what would they be ? 
But we dare not suppose the words of 
Him who is The Truth, to be anything 
but the truth; and it is their unquestioned 
truthfulness which gives them their charm 
and glory, and that truthfulness is veri- 
fied by His doings. The common sayings 
of a great man are prized; a simple sen- 
tence from a benefactor has a special 
significancy to the beneficiary. Hence 
the simplest words of the Saviour have a 
power, which nothing but His stoop to 
poverty, His suffering of shame, and His 
vicarious death for the sinner, could give 
them. His eloquence was in His actions, 
and without the deeds, the declarations 
even of a God would fail to affect us. 
What then shall we think of the so-called 
eloquent harangues of men, who stand in 
crimsoned pulpits and discourse to hearers 
who sit in cushioned pews, about the glo- 
rious gospel, and the heathen groaning 
beneath the load of generations of pagan- 
ism, and then make no corresponding 
effort to lift that load and lead the suf- 


(January, 


ferers to heaven? Measuring the elo- 
quence of such orations by the practical 
efforts of the orator, how often do his 
words of seeming eloquence become tame 
and tiresome! God is waiting for an 
eloquence of action among His professed 
friends, — while they seem still to be 
waiting in Jerusalem for the promised 
power from on high, which they have 
failed to receive, because they have failed 
to pray for it, or fear to use it for Him. 


WOMEN IN INDIA. 


Woman in India, as in all barbarous 
and semi-civilized nations, feels the influ- 
ence of that barbarism, and occupies a 
position in society far beneath that which 
she is entitled to as a moral and intel- 
lectual being. She is but the slave, the 
tool and convenience of her lord and 
master, dependent on his will not only 
for her subsistence, but for her conscience 
and entire rule of actien. Society has 
assigned her this subordinate position; 
custom has kept her there from time 
immemorial, and she has accepted her 
position not only as a necessity, but would 
regard any other as inappropriate and 
unbecoming. 

It is difficult for us, reared as we are 
where woman reigns queen, to under- 
stand the degraded condition of the un- 
educated, unhonored female of India. 
She is despised from her very infancy, 
Her birth is looked upon as a misfortune. 
The Hindoo delights not in his female 
offspring; while the boy is fondled and 
caressed, the girl is treated with indiffer- 
ence. The former is educated; the lat- 
ter is reared in ignorance and in the 
midst of domestic brawls. Never do you 
see a female in a Hindu school, save that 
one who, as soon as she arrives at age, is, 
as their saying is, to be married to the 
god; become the dancing-girl of the tem- 
ple, and lead a life of shame and infamy. 
According to Hindu law and custom, no 
female is allowed to learn the art of read- 
ing and writing, and hence when you see 
one with a book in her hands, you at 
once know her vocation and destiny. 

The rules relative to the conduct of 


1 
aE 
a 
3 


1870.] 


married women, as laid down in the 
Pasma Purana, a work of the highest 
authority among the Hindus, will still 
farther illustrate their degraded condition. 
One of them is as follows: “ Her husband 
may be crooked, aged, infirm, offensive in 
his manners; let him be choleric and dis- 
sipated, irregular, a drunkard, a gambler, 
a debauchee; suppose him reckless of his 
domestic affairs, even agitated like a 
demon; let him live in the world destitute 
of honor; let him be deaf or blind; his 
crimes and infirmities may weigh him 
down, but never shall his wife regard him 
but as her god. She shall serve him with 
all her might, obey him in all things, spy 
no defects in his character, nor give him 
any cause of disquiet.” 

From whatever stand-point we view the 
women of India, we shall find them thus 
down-trodden and degraded, living lives 
of uselessness or drudgery; among the 
higher and wealthier classes, not knowing 
how to pass the time and relieve their 
ennui; among the lower, overwhelmed 
and wearied out with toil and with the 
laborious duties of their household. Es- 
pecially are they given to the use of im- 
pure and indecent language, and there is 
not an obscene thought or word or allu- 
sion with which they are not perfectly 
familiar, and which they do not use with 
peculiar venom and energy when exas- 
perated and quarrelling. The latter isa 
pastime in singular favor, and nothing is 
more common than the sound of shrill 
voices, accompanied by furious threats 
and terrifying gesticulations. Many an 
effort to preach the gospel has been frus- 
trated by these feminine belligerents. 

Such is the female in India, and truly 
a sad picture is her life; still, as before 
remarked, she has accepted this position 
herself. She knows of nothing better, or 
higher, or nobler than her present expe- 
rience. To better her condition in life is 
a question she never disturbs or discusses, 
and the only way of rescuing her from 
her degradation, and placing her in the 
position she should occupy is to let the 
light into her soul. The females must be 
reached, influenced, instructed, and to a 
certain degree Christianized, before we 
can expect to make a general and perma- 


Miscellany : — Signs of Progress. 


29 


nent impression upon the male community. 
Though they occupy a degraded position 
in society ; though excluded from the ad- 
vantages of education; though reared 
with the idea that they must be subject to 
the direction, control and will of their 
husband and male relatives; though se- 
cluded and holding but little intercourse 
with any beyond the circle of their own 
household and immediate relatives, and 
though the Hindu himself does every- 
thing to foster the idea that the woman is 
his inferior, though he may say what he 
likes to depreciate her talents, her stand- 
ing, her objects in life: though he may 
assert his own independence with ever so 
much assurance, he is as much influenced 
by the females of the land as any human 
male being in existence. The Hindu 
wife, mother, and daughter, are in one 
sense the mistresses of their homes, often- 
times the directors of public opinion in 
their separate communities, and it is al- 
most an impossibility for their male rela- 
tives to effect anything without their ap- 
proval, consent and codperation. This 
may seem strange where woman occupies 
the position of a slave, and where, too, 
she is entirely uneducated, but such is 
nevertheless the fact ; and hence, to get at 
the men you must first get at the women. 
To raise, refine, and Christianize the 
former, you must elevate, instruct, and 
evangelize the latter. Many a book has 
been returned to us through the persua- 
sions and almost peremptory demands of 
the women. Audiences quietly listening 
to the preaching of the truth have been 
dissipated by them, and when converts 
have come to us, especially from the 
higher classes of the heathen, they have 
come to us not only in the face of, but al- 
most invariably without their wives and 
female relatives. The wife refuses to 
follow the husband, and is among the last 
to come. It is from her that he experi- 
ences the severest opposition. 
Rev. E. C. Scudder. 


SIGNS OF PROGRESS, 
Among other signs of progress of the 
kingdom of God in Bengal, is the estab- 
lishment of a weekly Christian newspaper 


= 

| 


36 


in the Bengali language, and conducted 
by native brethren of various churches. 
It bears the title of “ Saptahik Songbad ” 
(The Weekly News). An extract or two 
from this paper will be of interest. The 
first is interesting for the comments made 
on the fact recorded : — 

“On January 31st last, the bishop of 
Madras ordained thirty-four native Chris- 
tians to the office of ministers of the 
Gospel. They are to labor in connection 
with the churches in Tinnevelly, under 
the auspices of the Church Missionary 
and Propagation Societies. The native 
churches will furnish the half of their 
salary. We have also heard that in 
Travancore under the care of the London 
Missionary Society, there are 32,000 na- 
tive Christians. ‘These are accustomed, 
every month, to make a collection towards 
the support of their teachers. 

“ These people are not prosperous peo- 
ple, like the Calcutta Christians. Like 
the brethren of Krishnagur and the 
Southern villages, they are laboring men. 
How great their zeal to be independent 
churches! By reason of this zeal, their 
poverty is able to place no hindrance in 
the way of their desire to be independent. 
We have no such zeal. We are in the 
receipt of 100, 150, 200 rupees monthly 
salary, yet we impose upon the liberality 
of foreigners the charge of supporting 
those who every Sunday instruct us in 
the truths of religion, and we think noth- 
ing about it ourselves. There are those 
amongst us who, if they had zeal, could 
any one of them make a church inde- 
pendent of foreign aid; but they have no 
zeal. How can we give it them? We 


Donations. 


(January, 


have been a long time depending upon 
others. Now, Bengali brethren, let us in 
every respect seek to exhibit a desire to 
be independent. How long shall we con- 
tinue to cling to the neck of foreign Chris- 
tians ?” 

The next extract is interesting as a 
proof of the decline of idolatry in Cal- 
cutta 

“ Some old, respectable people at Cal- 
cutta have again established the Dhar. 
masabhi (Society of Religion). Its ob- 
ject is to preserve the Hindu religion. 
All intelligent people will understand 
how much good is likely to come from an 
attempt to preserve Hinduism. It would 
be more wise for Hindus of the present 
time to examine the Hindu Shastras to 
see whether Hinduism is true or false— 
whether salvation can be obtained by it 
or not. Otherwise the attempt to patch 
up the old garment will only make those 
who attempt it look more ridiculous. We 
expect that in a few years the barbarous 
Churruck Pooja (swinging festival) will 
be seen no more. Ever since the piere- 
ing with hooks has been forbidden, the 
excitement of the Pooja has become con- 
siderably Jess. Now, at Calcutta, the 
Festival is much less frequented than it 
used to be. Formerly, on the swinging 
day, it was difficult to move in the street 
in front of our office. Now, the number 
of people in the streets is about the same 
as on other days. In the case of the 
Doorga Pooja also, and other festivals, 
the attendance and excitement are grad- 
ually lessening. All this is a sign of 
good to the people.” — Baptist Miss. Her- 
ald. 


DONATIONS RECEIVED IN OCTOBER, 1869. 


MAINE. 
Warren, Ladies’ Bap. For. Mies. Soc., 

Mrs. E. A. Richardson tr., 12 
Jefferson, ch. and Soc. 5 
Waterville, Ist ch., 8. 8., tow. % 

of Adiram, nat. pr., care Rey. M. 
Bronson, Assam, 
East Harrington, ch., D. W. Dins- 
more tr., 
Turner, ch. 
NEW HAMPSHIRE. 


Dublin Asso., Joseph Foster tr., 


nial Asso., A. W. Richardson 
r. 
Exeter, Elm Stech. 


VERMONT, 


Saxton’s River, ch., for Miss A. R. 
Gage’s sch., Toungoo, Burmah, 
Berkshire Asso., Geo. Millard tr., 


MASSACHUSETTS. 
he a friend 250; another do. 


* 
00 600 35 81 
ad 
18 87 75 87 
a 24 81 271 00- 
4 


1870.] 


ringfield, Mrs. A. E. Waterman, 
in care of Miss A. 
R. Gage, Toungoo, Burmah, 
Medfield, ch., R.A. Battelle tr. 
Beverly, ch., Ladies’ Mission Circle, 
Mrs. L. C. Foss tr., 
linton, ch. 
emenios Asso., New Marlboro’, ch. 
No. Scituate, ch., G. W. Bailey tr., 
Newton, students of Newton Theo. 
Inst., tow. sup. of nat. pr., care 
Rev. D. L. Brayton, Rangoon, 
Burmah, 
Soc. of Miss. Inquiry of Newton 
Theo. Inst., P. B. Cross tr., 
East Abington, ch. 
Brookline, ch., mon. con. coll., Dea. 
Geo. Brooks tr. 
Worcester, Ist ch., G. W. Rugg tr. 
Framingham, ch. and 80¢., Ww. 
Nixon tr., 
Lowell, lst ch., Dea. J. A. Brabrook 


tr., 

Cambridge, ch. and soc., an. coll., J. 
B. Dana tr., 

West Acton, ch., of wh. 1.35 is mon. 
con. coll., 1.10 fr. Miss C. Brooks, 
and 8.55 8. 8. penny coll., 


RHODE ISLAND. 


K. I. State Convention, R. B. Chap- 
man tr., Providence, lst ch., mon. 
con. colls. 95.29; bal. sub. A. Cas- 
well .50; Dea. Reed 2; Stewart St. 
ch. 26.50 ; 

Wickford, Ist ch. 

Pawtuxet, ch., Mr. Chase tr., 

Newport, a friend 


CONNECTICUT. 


Jewett City, ch. 
Milton, Elizabeth Benedict 


NEW YORK. 


Rochester, 8. H. Phinney, tow. sup. 
of Moung See dee, nat. pr., care 
Rev. M. H. Bixby, Toungoo, Bur- 
mah, 29; Ist ch., 8. 8., to be ex- 
pended under care Rev. M. Bron- 
son, Assam, 100 ; 

Venice, ch. 

Whitesboro’, ch., per Rev. M. Bron- 


son, 
paameng, ch., bal. of a sister’s 


sub. 

Jasper, Miss M. J. Griffin 

Coll. per Rev. O. Dodge, Dist. Sec., 

Long Island Asso., Oyster Bay, ch. 
7; Huntington, ch. 4.15; Cold 
Springs, ch. 5.14; Greenport, ch. 
144.61; East Marian, ch. 25.40 ; 

~— River So. Asso., Yonkers, 
ch. 

Dutchess Asso., Amenia, ch. 96.42 ; 
North East, ch. 24.75; Mrs. L. L. 
Jones 10; Pine Plains, Mrs. ©. 
Husted 5; P. W. Husted 6; Jus- 
tus Booth 4; Stanford, Ist ch. 


22.35 ; 
Hudson River Central Asso., Stan- 
ford, 2d ch. 


ay per Rey. J. B. Pixley, Dist. 


Canisteo River Asso., rec’d fr. tr. 

Monroe Asso., Parma, Ist ch., of wh. 
3.61 is fr. 8. 8. 19.82; United 
Henrietta, ch., of wh. 4.37 is fr. 8. 
8., 16.87; Wheatland, ch. 25.87; 
Penfield, ch. 37.50; Churchville, 
ch., Rev. J. Elliott, 5; 

Chemung River Asso., Elmira, ch., 
Mrs. Wismer 1; Mrs. Johnson 25; 
Mr. C. Bovier 2; 

ch 
ne sso., Oneida, ch., in 
35; Durhamville, ch. 2; Uhies, 
Tabernacle ch. 40; 


aco 
Sess 


8 
ss ee 


gs 
es 


Donations. 81 


11 00 1,626 24 


ss 


120 00 
3 50 
23 31 

30 
5 70 
186 30 
881 27 


167 52 
25 00 


61 53 


108 56 


77 00 


251 95 


Niagara Asso., Hartland, ch., in 
rt, 63.60; West Somerset, ch. 
62; Somerset, lst ch., in part, 


-58 ; 107 80 
Buffalo Asso., Washington 8t.ch. 155 20 1,421 90 
NEW JERSEY. 


Paterson, Alex. W. Rogers, M. D. 89 33 
Coll. per Rev. J. V. Ambler, Dist. 


Sec., 

Trenton, Central ch. 14.06 ; Jacobs- 
town, ch. 34.50; Orient, ch. 4 ; 
Roadstown, ch. 50; Middletown, 


ch. 35.50; 188 06 227 39 
PENNSYLVANIA. 
Laporte and Eaglesmere, ch. 5 00 
Philadelphia, Wm. Bucknell, 1,000; 


L. A. U. 50; 1,050 00 
ae per Rev. J. V. Ambler, Dist. 


Centre Asso., Stone Creek, ch. 3.50; 


Chavers Creek, ch. 2; 6 60 
Clarion Asso., Brody's Bend, Berean 
ch. 5; Warsaw, ch. 4; 9 00 


Philadelphia, a lady, for —< stu- 
dent in Theo. gem., ngoon, 
Burmah, under Rev. J. G_ Bin- 
ney, 25; friends, 4; 2d ch. 58; 87 00 1,156 50 
DELAWARE. 
Rey. J. V. Ambler, Dist. 
Wilmington, Dr. Cornelius, to be ex- 
pended under care Rev. E. O. Ste- 
vens, Prome, Burmah, 20 00 
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA. 
Washington, Calvary ch.,H. Beard 


tr. 28 40 
TENNESSEE. 
Memphis, Rev. Sam’! G. Silliman 14 00 
OHIO. 

Norwalk, ch. 51 00 
Cincinnati, 9th St. ch., J. W. Shep- 

pard tr., 846 52 
Owl Creek, ch., dying gift of Miss 

Jennie Evans 5 00 
Richfield, ch. 4 00 


Wills Creek Asso., John Hughes tr., 6 66 
Marietta, Ist ch., F. E. Pearce tr., 82 95 
Coll. per Rey. T. Allen, Dist. Sec., 
Mt. Vernon Asso., Mt. Vernon, ch. 16 63 
Mad River Asso., Mechanicsburg, 

ch., in part, 9.35; Wills Creek, 

ch., in part, 53.75 ; 63 10 
Miami Union Asso., Dayton, Ist ch., 

in part, 102; Wayne St. ch. 29; 

Urbana, ch. 8.62; Springfield, 

Trinity ch. 29.60; Columbia, ch., 

in part, 32 35; 201 47 
Ashtabula Asso., Jefferson, ch. 

14.10; Cherry Valley, ch. 8; 

Colbrook, 50; Rey. C. 8S. Thomas 

1; Coll. at Asso. 608; fr. tr. of 

Asso., 15.18; 89 76 767 09 

INDIANA. 


Manchester, Mrs. Martha Wicks, 
tow. sup. of nat. pr.in Burmah, 21 00 
Indianapolis, Edgar J. Foster, tow. 
sup. of child under Miss R. H. 
Adams, Thongzai, Burmah, §1 12 
Coll. per Rev. T. Allen, Dist. Sec., 
Bethel Asso., Livonia, ch., of wh. 
1.50 is fr. 8. S., 10 fr. J. K. How- 
ard; 5f1. Mrs. E. Kelso, 1 fr. E. 


McPheters, 

Sand Creek Asso., No. Vernon, Rey. 

W. T. Stott 2 50 
Tippecanoe Asso., Delphi, ch. 20 00 
Brownstown Asso., Seymour, ch., of 

wh. 2 is fr. 8. 8. 10 35 


Indiana State Convention, Coll. at 
| Convention, of wh. 6 is fr. Rev. J. 


B. Shaff, Shelbyville, 5 fr. John 
Kanower, Huntington, and 6 fr. J. 
Fisher, Wabash, 


ILLINOIS. 
Coll. per Rev. S. M. Osgood, Dist. 


~ 

Carroliton Asso., Jerseyville, ch., of 
wh. lis fr. W. H. Togue, 80.05 ; 
Virden, ch. 1; 

Chicago Asso., Bloomingdale, ch. 
26.75; Woodstock, ch. and 8. S., 
tow. sup. of Pariah, nat. pr. un- 
der Rey. J. E. Clough, Ongole, In- 
dia, 50; 

Dixon Asso., Freeport, ch., A. H. 
Wise, tow. sup. of Ramkee, nat. 
pr. under Rey. I. J. Stoddard, 
“wee Assam, 60; York, ch. 


Fox River Asso., Big Rock, ch. 10; 
Chicago, Indiana Av. ch. 48 62; 
University Place ch., 8. 8., for 
Normal sch., Nowgong, Assam, 
under Miss M. Bronson, in part, 
76; Theo. Sem. Berean Soc. 2; 
Sandwich, ch. 43.38 ; Somonauk, 
ch. 14.78; 

Louisville Asso., Xenia, ch. 

Mackinaw Asso., Fairbury, ch. 
Mason City, ch., 8. 
cating nat. pr. in ‘Rev. . 
Clough’s sch., Ongole, india 

McLean Asso., Bloomington, ch. 
90.07; Normal, ch. 15.80; 

Nine Mile Asso., ‘Duquoin, ch. 8.36; 
Nine Mile, ch. 6; 

Quincy Asso. , Quincey, Ist ch., Mrs. 
Mary Durfee, tor Mrs. Scott,” 

Springfield Asso., Jacksonville, ch., 
C. E. Wheeler 

Salem Asso., Raritan, ch., for Mrs. 
E. P. Scott, 


IOWA. 
Coll. per Rev. 8. M. Osgood, , Dist. 
See 


Burlington Asso. ch., 


Mrs. Ross, for E. Clough, 
5; Danville,ch. 1; Mt. Pleasant, 
ch. 4; Washington, ch., J. P. 
Dawson 5; 

Cedar Valley Asso., New Hartford, 
ch., 8. 8., tow. sup. of nat. pr. un- 
der Rev. J. E. Clough, Ongole, 
India, 

Central Towa Asso., Des Moines, ch. 
Rey. J. O. Wilson 

Davenport Asso., Davenport, Calva- 
ry ch. .50; Muscatine, ch. 10; 

Dubuque Asso., Maquoketa, ch., 8. 
8., tow. sup. of ministerial student 
in Rev. J. E. Clough’s sch., Ongo- 
le, India, 

East Grand River Asso. , Afton, ch. 
1; Sabula, ch. 1; 

Rden Asso., Franklin, ch., Rev. W 
H. Turton 

English River Asso., Forest Home, 
ch. 2; Fremont, ch. 1; 

Iowa Valley Asso., Grundy Centre, 
ch., A. F. Willoughby 

Keokuk Asso. , Harrisburg, ch. 11; 
Mt. Zion, ch. 10; 

Oskaloosa Asso. , Oskaloosa, ch., Rev. 
J. F. Childs’ 10; Ottumwa, ch., 
Rev. 8. L. Burnham, Rev. 8. H. 
Worcester, and Dea. Dana, 5 ea., 
15; Pella, M. W. Rudd, tow. sup. 
of ‘pat. pr. under Rev. I. J. Stod- 
dard, Gowalpara, Assam, 26 ; 


MICHIGAN. 
oe Rev. 8. M. Osgood, Dist. 
Flint River Asso., Hadley, ch. 


Lenawee Asso., Adrian, ch. 


Donations. 


Michigan Asso., Mt. Vesnee, ch. 
j Oakland, ch. 5; St. Clair, 


Wesheeney Asso., Ann Arbor, ch., 
of wh. 25 is fr. Rev. 8. Cornelius, 
Three Rivers, A. D. Wolsey 


MISSOURI. 
Coll. per Rey. 8. M. Osgood, Dist. 


Sec., 

St. Louis, Coll. at National Bap. 8. 
8. Convention, tow. the passage of 
Rev. M. Bronson, D. D., and 
daughter, to Assam, India, in 


WISCONSIN. 


Superior, fr. a missionary prayer- 
meeting 

West Salem, fr. the Scandinavian 
Baptists of La Crosse Co. 

Coll. per Rev. 8. M. Osgood, Dist. 


Sec., 

Janesville Asso. , Clinton, ch., 8. 8., 
coll. by a little girl 8 years old, for 
M. Bronson, Nowgong, 


la F Fay ette Asso., Bloomington, Mrs. 
Rhoda Winsworth 

Asso., Merton, ch. and 

Winnebago Asso., Ripon, ch., 8. 8., 
tow. sup. of Runkoo, nat. pr. un— 
der Rev. I. J. Stoddard, Gowal- 
para, Assam, 

MINNESOTA. 


Coll. tnd Rev. 8. M. Osgood, Dist. 


Minn. Valle Asso., Blue Earth City, 
Rey. A. Chute 


NEBRASKA. 
Coll. per Rev. S. M. Osgood, Dist. 


Nebraska Asso. 


CALIFORNIA, 


San Francisco Asso., of wh. 6 is fr.a 
friend, 56.75 gold, per Rev. J. W. 
Johnson, 


OREGON. 
Clackamus, ch. 


CANADA. 


Friends, per T. S. Shenston tr., 300 
gold, 
NOVA SCOTIA. 


Baptist Convention of Nova Scotia, 
New Brunswick, and Prince Kd: 
ward’s Island, 8. Selden tr. 1 

Coll. per Rev. "a. R. R. Crawley, 
8.67 gold, 

FRANCE. 


Coll. per Mr. A. Dez, 8t. Sauveur, 
ch. 69.41; La Feére, ch. 71.92; 
Chauny, ch. 101. 05; Denain, ch. 
106.27 ; Paris, ch. 130.65 ; 


LEGACIES, 


Strykersville, New York, Charles 
—- per C. H. Richardson, 
xr 

Rochester, New York, Mrs. Jane 
Denny, per C. B. Denny, Exr., 
950, less Govt. tax, 57 


Donations and Legacies from April 1, 
to Noy. 1, 1869, 


Donations and Legacies from April 1 
to Dec. 1, 1869, , 


(January, 1870, 


(564 85 


11 01 1,575 36 


479 30 
$10,125 91 


125 00 


893 00 1,018 00 


$11,148 91 
$48,426 20 


$59,570 11 


32 
86 00 
10 0 $6 43 
76 75 825 04 
8 65 
57 00 
6 06 
5 00 
7 194 68 
200 50 
16 
80 00 
105 87 2575 66 45 
5 00 
vo >| 
8 50 > 
] 
5 60 
8 
30 00 y 
10 50 
8 30 
- 200 i 
1 00 
8 00 
61 00 186 70 
20 | ae 
27 15 


