Source: Johann E. Pritzkau, German Baptists in South Russia, trans. Walter Regehr (Winnipeg, MB: Kindred Press / CMBS, 2013), 185 pp. Original: Geschichte der Baptisten in Sud-Russland, Odessa, 1914.
Primary review used: Andrew Dyck, Direction: A Mennonite Brethren Forum, Fall 2015, 44/2, pp. 221-224.
URL: https://directionjournal.org/44/2/german-baptists-in-south-russia.html
Also: mbherald.com/19098/ (translation announcement); kindredproductions.com product page.
Verified 2026-06-19. Excerpts/paraphrase from review only; not the book text.

--- REVIEW EXCERPTS (Andrew Dyck, Direction 44/2) ---

"Johann Pritzkau (1842-1924) wrote German Baptists in South Russia, first published in 1914, as a personal and researched history of this particular group of Baptists (i.e., distinct from Russian Baptists). Pritzkau was a longstanding leader among Baptist congregations that emerged among south Russia's German communities at the same time and in the same place that Mennonite Brethren congregations began. Half a century later, commissioned by the United South Russian Conference of German Baptists, Pritzkau sought to 'leave to posterity historical evidence of what great things the Lord did' (xxv)."

"The chapters ... divide into three groups (not unlike the history of Mennonite Brethren by Peter M. Friesen). The first twelve chapters describe the beginnings of the German Baptists in south Russia, including persecutions, relations with governments, key Baptist leaders ... and the eventual creation of a formal association and regular Bible courses. ... chapter two summarizes the beginnings of the Mennonite Brethren and highlights their close association with the German Baptists. The next section presents the founding and development of ten German Baptist churches. Pritzkau concludes with five chapters that assess the privileges, needs, dangers, and prospects facing German Baptists ..."

"He highlights Pietism's influence among the Baptists, crediting Eduard Wuest as one of the Lutheran pastors who introduced Pietism's 'fire of the Spirit' (1) to the German communities."

"Most notably, Pritzkau credits Mennonite Brethren with introducing believers baptism and immersion baptism to the German Baptists (9), most of whom had previously received infant baptism as Lutherans. (According to P. M. Friesen, the early Mennonite Brethren themselves first learned of immersion baptism from the writings of an American Baptist missionary, Anne Judson, and of an Evangelical Free Church author from Switzerland.) Pritzkau's portrayal of these interactions suggests that the Mennonite Brethren were more influential among Baptists than vice versa."

"Pritzkau's valuing of all things German seems evident also in his explanation that when a Russian-speaker became a Christian through the influence of Baptists, that person didn't need to be incorporated into a German Baptist church because there were sufficient Russian-language churches (138)."

"the intimate fellowship that bound Baptists and Mennonite Brethren 'together as children in one home' (73) was disrupted by the unique governmental privilege accorded to Mennonites in Russia. Because of this legal privilege, non-Mennonite new believers could not be formally accepted into Mennonite Brethren congregations but only into Baptist congregations (124)."

"the Russian government granted Mennonites exemption from military service, but Mennonites could extend this privilege only to their direct descendants. ... Mennonite Brethren held diverse opinions about nonresistance, and were inconsistent in practicing nonresistance (74-75). Baptists, on the other hand, became convinced that the Bible 'does not teach a nonresistance...prior to the millennial reign of Christ' (75)."

"Peter M. Friesen was one such pastor (144)." [MB pastoring Baptist congregations]

EDITORIAL NOTE: English book; quotations here are from the academic review. Per project policy, reader-facing Russian text must translate; English kept only as source identifier.
