THE 


MISSIONARY MAGAZINE. 


Vou. L.— DECEMBER, 1870.— No. XII. 


AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSIONARY UNION. 
~ 
RECENT INTELLIGENCE. 


TreLooGoo Mission. Mr. Clough, of the station at Ongole, reports whole villages 
turning to Jesus, and three hundred awaiting baptism. The brethren continue to 
urge the importance of a Theological Institution for the training of native preachers 
for the wide and opening fields. In quite a number of villages the people have de- 
molished their gods and temples, and formally renounced idolatry. See p. 434. 


Sram. Dr. Dean describes a recent visit to the church members and others in 
Banplasoi, to encourage the weak and set in order things that were defective. He 
also describes the baptism of five more Chinese, and gives a touching account of a 
family scene, illustrating the Chinese care of the aged and blind. The native converts 
show much liberality in carrying forward the work of the mission. See p. 439. 


Burmau. Mr. Haswell gives an interesting account of a visit to K’ Mahwet, show- 
ing the progress of the converts at that station in knowledge and piety. The native 
preacher reports additional baptisms at the same place, and the prospect is that a 
new Burmese church will shortly be organized there. The work grows on every 
hand. 

Mr. Rand describes the state of the Karen schools at Maulmain and vicinity. Con- 
siderable time is spent in them in the study of the Bible. The Government aid hitherto 
granted has been of great advantage, but fears are entertained that the schools may 
decline for want of funds. Some Karen villages, ten miles from Amherst, proposed to 
build a school-house, if they can have help for the roofing. 

Mrs. Van Meter maintains the necessity of the Normal School in Bassein as an in- 
strument of the salvation of the people, and a help in calling out and training teach- 
ers and theological students, But more funds are needed in this department. More 
pupils offer themselves than the mission can support. There is great need of more 
native preachers, and of the means of sending them forth and sustaining them in the 
field. 

The various missionaries to the Karens in Burmah have forwarded an appeal on 
the subject of a higher education for that people than is now provided for, sketching, 
in fact, the nucleus of a college curriculum. The communication will be found on p. 
437. 

VOL. L. 27 


434 Mission to the Teloogoos : — Letter from Mr. McLaurin. (December, 


SwepeEn. Mr. Broady presents an interesting account of the school for preachers 
at Stockholm and of the recent and former graduates. He advocates a four years’ 
course of study and the elevation of the preparatory training. Notices are also for- 
warded of the state and brightening prospects of the work, and of the passage of a 
recent law, giving to dissenters from the National Church full political rights. See p. 


442. 


Spain. Prof. Knapp gives an account of the organization of the First Baptist 
Church in Madrid, with the list of its officers, and the present state of the work; also, 
of the difficulties of the position and the wants of the work. 


GERMANY. The work in Southern Russia goes forward. New cases of baptism aré 
reported at Alt-Danzig ; also in the vicinity of Odessa. 
The Danish Association has recently held its annual meeting, and favorable reports 


come from many of the churches. 


LETTERS FROM 
INDIA — MADRAS PRESIDENCY. 


PRission to the Teloogoos. 


LETTER FROM Mr. CLouGH. 


Whole Villages Turning to Jesus, On- 
gole, Aug. 6, 1870.— Our work still 
moves on like a noble river. Every month 
I hear of whole villages that are casting 
away their idols and turning to Jesus for 
salvation; 183 have united with us since 
January ist. The last company, fifteen in 
number, were baptized last Sabbath. Bra. 
Timpany and McLaurin were present, 
having come up to see the place, preach- 
ers, people, etc., etc., with us. Br. Me- 
Laurin was highly pleased with all he saw ; 
we are glad, because he will have so much 
more courage to wade through the Teloo- 
goo roots and idioms. 


Three Hundred Awaiting Baptism. 

Our native preacher, Kondiah, support- 
ed by the Sabbath-school in Burlington, 
Iowa, who labors north-west of Cum- 
bum, and between that city and the 
Ghauts, stated that he thought that at 
least 300 on his field were ready for bap- 
tism. I am off for that locality within 
two or three days. The weather is very 
hot, but I believe I shall be taken .care of, 
and have no fears. 


THE MISSIONS. 


Bible Class. The month of May and 
part of June the native preachers, school- 
teachers, etc., were all in Ongole. We 
formed ourselves into a Bible class, and 
together went over the Epistles to Timo- 
thy and Titus, 

A few months ago I wrote in behalf of 
the Teloogoo Mission, begging for the 
Theological school which I have men- 
tioned so many times during the past 
three years. I hope God has given the 
request favor in the sight of the Exec- 
utive Committee and the Baptists of 
America. The need is great; but I need 
say no more than I wrote. I have noth- 
ing new to say, and nothing to take 
away. 


Letrrer From Mr. McLaurin. 


Mercies Received. Ramapatam, June 
4, 1870. When thinking at first on the 
subject of missions, I think I prayed from 
the bottom of my heart, ‘* Teach me Thy 
way, O Lord, and lead me in a plain 
path.” And surely in a marvellous man- 
ner, He has answered that prayer. I feel 
persuaded more and more every day that 
“ All things work together for good to 
them that love God, to them who are the 
called according to His purpose.” While 


r 
: 


1870 } 


some people receive this good in the shape 
of afflictions and reverses and thwartings 
of schemes, I and mine have received 
ours in goodness and mercy, following us 
all our way and even in India. ‘ The 
lines have fallen unto us in pleasant places, 
and the Lord has blessed us with a goodly 
heritage.” The clear, plain path He 
opened up before me with reference tomy 
friends in Canada, the happy termination 
He put to the delay of last year in Wood- 
stock, which sent us over sea and land in 
less than eight weeks, landed us here in 
the cool season, just after br. Timpany had 
removed to Ramapatam, two months sooner 
than at first intended, and sent us a Moon- 
shee as soon as we were ready for one ; 
and to Ramapatam, a delightfully cool, 
pleasant place by the sea-shore, where we 
have no fear but that we may become lazy, 
and where we had the great pleasure and 
privilege of attending the Convention in 
March and assisting in making the breth- 
ren and sisters comfortable, — these are a 
few of the mercies we have received since 
we left the loved land beyond the flood. 
Mrs. McLaurin is better in health at pres- 
ent than she has been for some years, 
certainly since I saw her. I never felt 
better in my life, although I would feel 
better if I could get along faster with the 
Teloogoo. We bave not had a day’s sick- 
ness since we landed. O how thankful we 
should be! 


Importance of Theological Instruction. 
The brethren had a good meeting in 
March. They were singularly unanimous 
in all their schemes and plans. Of course, 
knowing nothing of the field or its wants, 
I could offer no advice, and help them in 
little, except routine business. I hope the 
Committee has given a favorable response 
tothe education scheme. A mission which 
has over a thousand members at present, 
and we hope and believe, thousands more 
before the end of this year, requires some 
system of teaching native pastors and as- 
sistants. What are we going to do with 
them? We dare not leave them in their 
ignorance. We cannot teach one in a 
hundred of them. Of course, grave ques- 
tions will arise about this. “ A little learn- 
ing is a dangerous thing,” unless of the 


Mission to the Teloogoos : — Letter from Mr. McLaurin. 


4385 


right ring. It is hard to educate these 
men without separating them from their 
people, that is giving them an improper 
feeling of superiority ; but still it must be 
done. They must be raised, and gradu- 
ally they must raise their people. It will 
be no fool’s business to train these men. 
The man must know the work these men 
have to do. He must know the people 
they have to instruct, and he must know 
his men too, 

The Ramapatam compound appears to 
have been given for this purpose. Here 
we are cool and comfortable, while they 
are melting with heat in Nellore and On- 


gole. 


Continued Baptisms. God is dealing 
very graciously with the mission. Br. 
Clough baptized twelve last month, and 
expects to go to the water to-morrow. 
At Nellore there is unusual interest just 
now. O God, bring many souls out of it. 
Br. Timpany, in his last visit out, baptized 
thirty. To-morrow we expect quite a 
number in. They are coming as I write, 
salaaming with gleaming faces. ‘There is 
considerable light in their featu.es, though 
there is considerable dark too. 


Baptism — Renouncing Idolatry. June 
6.— Yesterday was a good day for the 
“ Lone Star Mission.” I baptized eleven 
into the likeness of their Lord and Master. 
Many more would have been in, only that 
it is threshing time with them, and all 
cannot leave at the same time. Whole 
villages are believing. In quite anumber 
they have torn down their gods and tem- 
ples, and formally renounced idolatry. 


Home Questions for Christians. Shall 
we follow in the footsteps of our conquer- 
ing Lord? Is this mighty revival to be 
followed up? How? It is as impossible 
for the men here at present to do it, as 
for you in America. We have only half 
the year. The sun would kill us the rest.. 
It appears to me simply wicked for a man 
to pray for such a revival as this in a mis- 
sion, and then not give for the purpose of 
following itup. When we pray for a 
thing, do we not pray too, for all the nat- 
ural and necessary results? When we 


486 Mission to Karens : — Letter from Mrs. Van Meter. (December, 


pray that the heathen should be discipled, 
do we not pray that they should be bap- 
tized and taught? Are we at liberty to 
pray the Commission by pieces, or is it in 
its entirety we should present it ? 


Giving Good Evidence. Some of those 
men baptized yesterday never saw a 
preacher, native or foreign, and never 
heard of Jesus until a few weeks ago. 
And yet it seemed as if there was no mis- 
take about their conversion. One man 
said that he felt it in his soul, and we 
could not shake him. He knew it. Yes- 
terday, I was trying, through an interpre- 
ter, to give them a short account of the 
Bible story, from the Creation to the As- 
cension of Christ. O, it was painful to 
see the amazement depicted on their 
faces; they had never heard so much 
Bible before. 

We cannot realize their position. And 
then, when we remember the kind of men 
we have to teach them, I often wonder that 
any of them are exemplary. But God 
keeps them, and will keep them by His 
mighty power, through faith unto salva- 
tion. 

We expect good news from Nellore and 
Ongole in a few days. We cannot give 
up praying for their conversion, for their 
teaching. Jehovah Jireh. 

The most of these people came a dis- 
tance of forty miles, some came sixty, 
with their rice on their backs. 


BURMAH. 
PAlssion to Ravens. 


Lerrer FROM Mr. Ranp. 


Karen School in Maulmain. — Maul- 
main, July 6, 1870. — The school seems to 
be flourishing under the instruction of 
teacher Pah-thay, for the Sgau, and 
Kya-o, for the Pwo department. Both of 
these teachers, I think, have spent some 
time in Dr. Binney’s school. There are 
fifty scholars, two thirds of whom are boys. 
The most advanced are studying Dr. 
Wade’s Grammar, Mr. Cross’s Arithmetic, 
and Mrs. Thomas’ Geography. The Pwos 


use Mr. Brayton’s Arithmetic. Consider- 
able time is spent reading and studying 
the Bible. They spend several hours in the 
school-room during the day, and an hour 
in the evening, when they do not come to 
sing. Some of the scholars are learning 
to read. This ought not to be so, and I 
hope in a few years, the standard of schol- 
arship will be raised in this school, and 
schools established in the villages, so that 
the latter may be feeders for the former. 

I am afraid we shall not be able to 
continue the school more than a month 
longer, for want of funds. The school 
has had government aid for two years, and 
the promise of aid this year ; but I do not 
feel so sanguine about receiving it, because 
there have been so many changes here 
lately. ‘Still, I may be happily disap- 
pointed. 

I cannot speak definitely concerning 
the village schools, as I have not been 
here long enough. I know, however, that 
one or two are destitute. 


Karen Building near Amherst. We 
spent the month of April at Amherst, by 
advice of the friends there, and br. James 
Haswell walked out with me about ten 
miles to visit a Karen village. They 
promised to build a. school-house and 
chapel combined, if we could pay for the 
roofing. So Dr. Haswell gave them five 
rupees and I gave them five more, when 
they came to the ordination at Amherst. 
I have not heard from the village lately. 


State of the Churches. 1 cannot speak 
definitely concerning the state of the 
churches. The Minutes of the last Asso- 
ciation show a slight increase in member- 
ship over that of the preceding year. 

The language comes slowly. We did 
not succeed in having a regular teacher 
till after the first of May, and now, after 
two months’ study, our vocabulary seems 
quite limited. Still I think we pick up 
some almost every day. 


LerreR FROM Mrs. VAN METER. 


Bassein Normal School. Bassein, July 
27, 1870.— The natural, and I do not 


1870.) Mission to Karens: — Proposal for a Higher Institution. 


need to say, the very necessary work of 
the season, is our Normal School, which 
is, for elevating the character of our peo- 
ple, for training up their school teachers, 
and for calling out preachers and theologi- 
cal students, the very fountain-head, or 
the feeder of the mission. 


The School Needing Funds. This year 
after all we could do to collect from 
the Karens, finding their contributions 
amounting to only Rs. 200, with which to 
buy paddy and everything, I wrote to 
all the villages that we could not refuse 
one, two or three from each village, and 
wished in every case the young men and 
women would teach school the coming 
season, and that those who were expecting 
to enter the Theological School should 
come ; but more than that, we could not 
receive, and we ought to limit the number 
to less than twenty. But sending in their 
“only a very few,” we commenced with 
thirty-seven, all so earnest and promising, 
that we felt we could not turn them away. 
Several of our young men are from fam- 


ilies who have but recently begun to wor- 
ship. 


Sickness of a Native Preacher. The 
Karens are anxiously asking about the 
teacher. Last year was a hard year pe- 
cuniarily for the Karens, and for months 
past there has been a great deal of sick- 
ness. At present Thah Bwah, one of 
our oldest and most efficient preachers, is 
seriously ill. 


Want of Preachers. The churches and 
most of the members are steadfast, and we 
hear very good reports of the new wor- 
shippers ; but the scarcity of our preachers 
does not enable us yet to supply these 
openings. Rather, there are several of 
our best educated preachers and pastors, 
this season, stopping to teach and to work 
in part in the fields in our Christian villa- 
ges, because we have not means from 
which to aid them so that they can sup- 
port their families in their new fields. 

How important it is that the native 
preachers should be kept at work to the 
best advantage, especially in the absence 
of the missionary ! 


4387 


PROPOSAL FOR A HIGHER INSTITU- 
TION GF LEARNING FOR THE KA- 
RENS OF BURMAH. 


TO THE FRIENDS OF KAREN EDUCATION. 


We the undersigned, Karen missiona- 
ries, feel that fidelity to our Master will 
not longer allow us to wait without mak- 
ing a special effort to start a General In- 
stitution, where the children of our native 
Christians can get a good education, with- 
out being obliged to go to Roman Cath- 
olic schools for it. For years past our 
hearts have been pained to see the work 
on our hands suffering severely for want 
of such an institution. 

We see Catholicism and Ritualism 
crowding in upon us. And Karen Chris- 
tians have reached the point where they 
begin to see something of the value of an 
education. Many of their children are 
panting for it, and have it they will. 
They see flourishing and popular schools 
in our midst; and though these schools are 
under the influence of the “ Beast with 
seven heads and ten horns,” the Karens 
do not see the evil which lurks behind a 
fair exterior. But we are the watchmen 
upon the walls of Zion; we see *‘ the 
sword coming,” and we dare not hold our 
peace. If, as American Baptists, we do 
not bestir ourselves at once, and furnish a 
place, where these children of some 20,000 
Christians can obtain a thorough educa- 
tion, it is our solemn and deep conviction 
that the opportunity will soon be lost; and 
we shall be under the painful necessity of 
seeing the mission, to a great degree at 
least, pass out of our hands into that of 
mere formalism. 

Do not let us be misunderstood here. 
We yield to no one in our estimation of the 
paramount importance of “ preaching the 
Word.” That is first and foremost in all 
evangelical efforts. And nothing must be 
allowed on any account, or in any way, to 
cripple or interfere with that work. And 
it is because we thus feel, that we feel so 
deeply the importance of education. We 
cannot, as practical men, ignore the vast 
importance of this work as an auxil- 
iary. 

Existing facts clearly demonstrate that 
the school-teacher must follow in the wake 


438 


of the preacher, or the work of the latter 
will be comparatively fruitless. 

We cannot cease to try and “ teach 
them all things commanded.” We need 
only to point to the present efforts through- 
out Christendom on the subject of educa- 
tion, to show its value as felt by the Chris- 
tian world. 

Brethren, the time is short. What we 
do for Jesus must be done quickly. In 
the last great day, we shall not have occa- 
sion to regret that we have done too much 
for Him, who, “ though He was rich, yet 
for your sakes became poor, that ye 
through His poverty might be rich.” 

Dear friends, let us have your hearty 
codperation without delay, and a most in- 
teresting people may be saved from the 
clutches of the adversary. 

What we want is, 

1. That at least one Institution should 
be established in Burmah for general edu- 
cation among the Karens ; that from how- 
ever low a point the Institution may depart 
and however small may be the beginning, 
the Institution and instruction should an- 
nually go forward, until there is here in 
Burmah, secured, what may be properly 
called, a liberal education for the Karens. 

2. That the Institution should be pro- 
vided with suitable teachers, buildings, 
and means of giving effective instruction, 
etc., and that suitable persons who wish 
to d»so, shall be allowed to pursue their 
studies through the medium of the English 
language. 

8. It is our earnest wish that this work 
should be done indirectly in connection 
with the Karen Theological Seminary, by 
the American Baptist Missionary Union.t 
But, 

4. Should they not desire to engage at 
once in such a work, it should be, until 
otherwise decided under the direction and 
advice of a Committee appointed for the 
purpose, or in some such way, by the do- 
nors and supporters of the Institution. 

5. It is our wish and united request, 
that Dr.’ Binney, with such assistance as 
he may select, should present and push 

1 The Executive Committee have entertained 
with favor the views of the brethren, and made 
arrangements, which will in due time secure the 
objects aimed at in this communication. 


Mission to Burmans : —Letter From Mr. Haswell. (December 


this subject among the friends of the Ka- 
ren Mission, to some immediate practical 
result. 

The above, subject to any verbal alter- 
ation which any one may suggest before it 
shall be sent away. 

Rangoon, Dec. 1869. 

The above document has been signed 
by all the Karen missionaries in the field, 
this date, Jan. 1, 1870, namely, — 

J. WADE. 

J. G. Binney, 

D. L. Brayton, 
N. Harris, 

D. A. W. 
C. H. CARPENTER, 
I. D. 

J. F. Norris, 

A. BUNKER. 


PAissfon to Burmans, 
Lerrer From Mr. HAsweE.u. 


Visit to K’Mahwet. Maulmain, Aug. 5, 
1870. — Since my last date I have made a 
second visit to K’Mahwet, this time accom- 
panied by my old “ yoke-fellow,” Moung 
Reuben, leaving home July 7th, and be- 
ing absent nine days. I enjoyed the trip 
exceedingly, and returned from it encour- 
aged to renewed effort. 

We spent seven nights at K’Mahwet, 
holding meetings for preaching every 
evening during my stay. At these services 
and on the Sabbath, all the Christians 
were present, and from half a dozen to 
twenty unconverted, rather unbaptized, 
adults; for I believe some of them are 
converted. We also met, according to 
the custom of the converts from the begin- 
ning, Wednesday Pp. M., for prayer and 
conference. Saturday afternoon we had 
a genuine covenant meeting preparatory 
to the communion, in which all the con- 
verts took part. Reuben became ears for 
me, so I gained the substance of all that 
was said. It did my soul good to see 
them talk, and what was better, willing to 
talk: some of them with tears trickling 
down their cheeks as they spoke. All 
bore testimony to “the glorious hope set 
before usin the gospel.” What cheered 


1870.] 


me most was to see the burden of soul for 
the salvation of their friends, which they 
all manifested. It was to me the earnest 
of a blessing near at hand. 


Refreshing Sabbath. On Sabbath morn- 
ing we had the Sunday-school, thirty-five 
strong. At 10:30, preaching; preach- 
ing again in the evening, after which we 
observed the Lord’s Supper, which was 
watched most closely, with great interest, 
by many who could not join with us. 
After all, the evening services, consisting 
of singing, reading Scripture, prayer, 
and a sermon, closing with prayer. Tea 
was handed round to the grown people, 
and the time spent in religious conversa- 
tion. We rarely broke up before eleven, 
Pp. M., and more than once, after I had re- 
tired, some of the people tarried long 
past midnight. I never had such listeners 
in Burmah, or felt greater joy and comfort 
in preaching anywhere. I came away 


feeling that the Lord was indeed at work 
in the hearts of the people. 


Spirit of Persecution. There is much 
opposition in the village towards the native 
Christians, and those who are favorably 
disposed. Spies were set by the priests 
on the Sabbath, unknown at the time, to 
report every one who came to meeting ; 
yet we had good congregations at both 
services. There were four men, not bap- 
tized Christians, who at that time kept the 
Sabbath and attended meeting regularly 
with the Christians, Of these, I hope at 
least one man and his wife (middle-aged) 
are really converted. They yet hold back 
from baptism, mainly the effect of great 
opposition to it and persuasion of their 
relatives, who are all against them. The 
truth will prevail. 


Candidates for Baptism. 1 left Reuben 
at K’Mahwet. He had been absent from 
his post nearly three months on account 
of the serious illness of his wife. I was 
hardly surprised this week to receive a 
letter from him, saying that four persons 
were waiting for me to come and baptize 
them. One of these applicants is a mar- 
ried woman, her husband yet a heathen. 
Two of them are a young man and wo- 


Chinese Mission of Bangkok : — Letter from Dr. Dean. 


439 


man, children of converts, and one an 
orphan girl. Of these, Reuben says, 
‘“‘ After meeting, these three applied for 
baptism. We all were greatly strength- 
ened, and rejoiced in heart by hearing the 
reason of their faith in Jesus Christ, and 
the evidence of their conversion.” I have 
sent word to K’Mahwet that I shall be 
there next week to spend the Sabbath, 
“if the Lord will.” I expect to report 
the organization of a new church at that 
point, at the next Convention. 


A Growing Work. The work grows on 
me all the time. Iam trying to visit Am- 
herst and K’Mahwet once amonth. Have 
done so for June and July. When br. 
Becker arrives, and the supervision of 
schools is taken off my hands, I shall try to 
extend such operations. I rejoice that so 
far my health has suffered in no respect. 
I feel as well and strong, and as much like 
work, as when I left Boston. I am happy 
and contented in the assurance that the 
Master of the vineyard put me here Him- 
self. 


Baptism at Maulmain. One week ago 
last Sabbath I baptized, at father’s request, 
a recent convert from the sepoy regiment 
in this place. There are probably not 
less than 20,000 natives of Hindustan 
within twenty miles of this place. We 
rejoice in the good tidings from Nellore. 
I tell the native Christians here, the work 
in Maulmain, under God, is in their hands, 
not in ours. When they take hold of it 
themselves, we may expect like great 
things here, not till then. 

Remember us in all our trials and in 
our work, at the throne of grace. God 
will not fail us. This work is His work. 


SIAM. 


Chinese Pllssfon of Bangkok. 
LETTER FROM Dr, DEAN. 


A Chinese Commodity. At nine 
o'clock in the evening of the 30th of June, 
I left my daughter in charge of our home, 
and all in the care of our Father, and 


440 Chinese Mission of Bangkok : — Letter from Dr. Dean. (December, 


embarked in a native boat for Banplasoi. 
The night was rather dark and rainy, 
but the boat was easily found at her 
moorings about a mile from the mission- 
house, ready to drop down the river at 
the falling tide. The craft had brought 
seven or eight tons of mussel for the 
China market, which, when taken from 
the shell and dried, sell here for $3 a 
picul of 133 lbs. They sometimes sell for 
$5 or $6 a picul, and the fishermen on 
the coast are now largely employed in 
gathering and curing them. Stakes, six 
or ten feet long are driven into the mud 
near the sea-shore, where the water is 
shallow, and the mussel soon cover the 
stake on all sides from its top to its foot, 
and the growth of a year leaves the 
stake covered with shells scarcely more 
than an inch in diameter. After a growth 
of four or six years the shells, of a kid- 
ney shape, are found sometimes of five 
or six inches in length. They are gen- 
erally gathered when two or three years 
old. 


I found the cabin of our boat on deck, 
ten by twelve feet, and with an arched 
frame of bamboo covered with leaves, 
which in the arch was three feet high. In 
the cabin were the captain and owner, 
three sailors and two Chinese passengers, 
besides myself, not to count an indefinite 
number of various insects, whose names 
are not to be mentioned to sensitive ears. 
Our captain and fellow-passengers, (the 
last named class excepted,) after mutual 
salutations and inquiries, retired to rest, 
which left me to listen for an hour or two 
to the song of the boat boys, as they pad- 
died their little canoes about the river, 
calling out, “ Sugar cane, congee, cake 
and cigars, to eat!” Other boys in simi- 
lar boats, in the earlier part of the day, 
might be heard crying out, oil or ardent 
spirits, for sale. 


The Rich King. Leaving our moor- 
ings at midnight, the next morning found 
us floating past Pak Nam (river mouth), 
and soon the mat sail was hoisted to a 
gentle breeze, which before noon in- 
creased to a squall, and we were tossed 
on the threatening waves. At the close 
of the gale, an old sailor said, “ I pass the 


gulf nearly every week; but for seven 
years, I have not seen the like of this. 
We escaped without damage, except that 
a durian belonging to one of the sailors, 
and as large as his head, with a hard 
horny shell, broke loose during the squall 
and rolled across the cabin and smashed 
in pieces my water goblet. The captain 
very coolly called out, “ Never mind. The 
old teacher has a rich king in his country, 
who will give him plenty more.” He was 
told that the teacher had no rich king, as 
they supposed, in his native country, to 
give him water goblets; but he had a rich 
King in heaven, who gave him all he had 
and who also gave the captain this boat, 
and the sea to float it on, and the winds 
to waft it; and He had also given them 
charge not to sink us; otherwise, we all 
might now be in the deep. 

Before sundown we landed in safety at 
one of the ladders, which serve as a wharf 
at Banplasoi, and I paid the captain two 
ticals (120 cents) for my passage, which 
was twice as much as the Chinese passen- 
gers paid for the same accommodations. 
They charged me extra fare on the plea 
of being a “ red-haired man,” though they 
were forced to confess that my hair was 
not red, but white. 


Friendly Reception. On landing at a 
part of the town to which I was unaccus- 
tomed, I asked for an old church member 
living in that neighborhood, but whose 
name I had forgotten. On describing 
him as an old man and a _ fisherman, 
“OQ,” said one, “ he is one of the thirty- 
six,! and his name is called Pe Leang.” 

Passing on, I soon came to the stall of 
a brother in the market, who sold pork. 
He took me into his house, where his 
wife and children showed the usual Chi- 
nese hospitality of serving tea and fruits, 
and welcomed me with smiles and kind 
words. After the refreshments, and rest 
of ten minutes, I passed on, and soon met 
one of the teachers, who took me to the 
chapel, and one of the brethren went to 
the boat for my “ carriages” and parch- 
ments. We soon had a dinner of rice 
and fish and boiled eggs; and then fol- 


1 Thirty-six being then the number of mem- 
bers in the church. 


| 


1870.] 


lowed evening worship and a good night’s 
sleep. 


Visiting the Members. The next 
morning I called on some of the church 
members. The first had a family of six 
children, —the eldest sixteen years old. 
The next had seven children, from four 
months to seventeen years old. The 
third had six children, one an infant. 
The fourth had one daughter, three years 
old, whose father had taught her to repeat 
the first hymn in the Chinese Hymn-book. 
In the next household we found three 
children, the eldest seven years old. 
Some of the church members have no 
family, and others have left a family in 
China, to whom they hope to return. 
Some have been here two or three, others 
twenty or thirty years. 


Tempted by his Wife. One member 
said he could not take the Lord’s Supper 
to-morrow, because another brother had 
abused him. When told that he would 
thus grieve the Saviour, please the devil, 
and show himself the servant of his 
abusive brother, he met all considerations 
unmoved, till argument was followed with 
the entreaty of tears, when he arose and 
extended his hand, saying, “ Teacher, I 
will go, and leave others to settle their 
own account with the Master.” But 
to our grief, the next day did not find him 
at the house of God. On inquiry, we 
learned afterwards that his wife had per- 
suaded him that it would be unmanly for 
him to go to the Table with a man who 
had abused him; thus proving the power 
of woman’s influence for good or evil. 


Five Chinese Baptized. At the rising 
sun on Sabbath morning the church assem- 
bled at the chapel, when five Chinese 
were voted accepted candidates for mem- 
bership. ‘These were all baptized in the 
sea. The rising tide and calm sea met 
the wants of the occasion, and led to the 
remark from one of the brethren, that 
“God was very powerful and very good 
to make the tide and winds suit our con- 
venience. Each candidate, as he arose 
from the water, repeated the hearty 
“Amen.” On returning to the shore, a 


Chinese Mission of Bangkok : — Letter from Dr. Dean. 


441 


hymn was sung and a prayer offered, and 
the company returned, each to his home 
for breakfast. At about ten o’clock the 
party re-assembled for preaching, and 
were addressed from the words, “ Be per- 
fect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, 
live in peace, and the God of love and 
peace shall be with you.” A short recess 
followed, then the Lord’s Table was 
spread, a hymn sung, prayer offered, the 
right hand of fellowship given to those 
just baptized, and all sat down at the 
feast. 


“ A little Child shall lead them.” Among 
others, three of the members who had 
been frightened away by the Secret Soci- 
ety, came back with confessions and found 
an open door and open hearts to welcome 
them. Two other wandering sheep are 
bleating about the fold, and show signs 
of entering by the door. One blind 
brother was led by his granddaughter, ten 
Chinese miles, (two and a half miles Eng- 
lish) on Sabbath morning, to worship. 
This, with now and then an exception, is 
done every Sabbath. On the previous 
Sabbath the man was led by his grandson, 
a boy of ten years, but on the way home 
he was bitten by a dog. 

Last Sabbath, the boy being frightened 
by his experience of the previous Sabbath, 
his place was taken by his sister, a smil- 
ing girl of fourteen years, She had risen 
at an early hour, assisted her mother in 
preparing the breakfast for grandpa, and 
then with cheerful heart and steady hand 
led him over the winding way to the 
chapel. She was not in time to witness 
the baptisms, but listened attentively to 
the preaching and witnessed the observ- 
ance of the Lord’s Supper, and saw the 
deacon, in passing the bread, pause and 
place the sacramental emblem in the fin- 
gers of her sightless grandfather. At the 
close of the service she brought forward 
his hat and staff with smiling face and 
cheerful voice, and said, “ Grandfather, 
here’s your staff,” and then gave her hand 
to lead him home. The tears started at 
the lovely sight, and I felt like lifting my 
hat to him and to her. With such exam- 
ples, shall we pronounce Christian mis- 
sions a failure ? 


442 


In the evening a few of the neighbors and 
one more of the Secret Society men came 
in and joined usin the evening worship. 
I was enabled to read and explain to them 
the Scriptures for half an hour, and closed 
the day of unusual labor and unusual in- 
terest with singing and prayer. 


Question to be Settled. The only draw- 
back to the interest of the visit, came in 
connection with the arrangements for my 
return home. 

This was caused by a little strife be- 
tween the two deacons, to see who should 
be considered the greatest. I know not 
whether the strife came from “ apostolic 
succession,” or from still more ancient 
ancestry, or whether its origin and ances- 
try are traceable to the Chinese deacons 
here. The development on this occasion 
was attended with circumstances which 
tempted me to be lenient in rebuking it. 
It appears that each of the deacons had 
a boat, and each was emulous to give me 
a passage across the gulf. The kind of- 
fer of two placed me in a dilemma, since 
1 could not well embark at the same time 
on both, and could not patronize one 
without displeasing the other. Finally, 
I allowed self-interest to decide the ques- 
tion. As one was an open boat, I selected 
the other which had a cover. While all 
saw that I should be more comfortable in 
the boat which should shield me from the 
rain and sun, the owner of the rejected 
boat took leave of me with a long face 
and rather a fishy grasp of the hand. 


Fourth of July celebrated. — By a kind 
Providence, I had a pleasant passage over 
the gulf, and at Pak Nam dismissed my 
kind friend, with many thanks, and took 
a Post boat to Bangkok, but reached home 
too late to join my American friends in 
the recognition of the glorious 4th of July, 
as they had just returned from its celebra- 
tion at the house of one of the missionaries, 
where the exercises had been presided 
over by the United States Consul. Res- 
olutions, I am told, were offered, speeches 
were made, and a good time enjoyed, 
without the use of wine or gunpowder. 


Work of Native Preachers. July 28.— 


Mission to Sweden : — Letter from Mr. Broady. 


[December, 


_A Chinese shop keeper has gratuitously 

given the mission one sermon a week 
during the year, with the exception of a 
few Sabbaths. Mr. Partridge’s Chinese 
teacher has also been in the habit of 
preaching once on the Sabbath, without 
extra pay above his salary as personal 
teacher. 


Liberality of the Converts. — The 
church of Bangkok has paid during the 
year, on subscription, including the sums 
taken at the Lord's Supper, $76.72. 
This is appropriated for the support of a 
sexton at the two chapels, and to aid the 
poor of the church. 

The churches at Banplasoi and Lengkia- 
chu each support their own sexton and 
help their poor members. The native 
members have made some slight contribu- 
tions for the purchase of Chinese tracts. 

The church at Lengkiachu recently 
paid the triennial tax for a poor brother 
who was unable to pay for himself this 
government claim of about $2.50. Some 
of the members there have also repaired 
the road to the chapel, and renewed the 
enclosure about the chapel grounds. The 
members of the church here dis:over as 
much sympathy for each other, and do as 
much for the progress of the gospel, as 
could be expected of men so recently 
from the shades of heathenism. We are 
well supplied with chapels, have a good 
location and an ample field for labor. It 
only requires a vigorous cultivation and 
God's blessing, to gather a glorious har- 


vest. 


to Sweden, 
Lerrer FROM Mr. Broapy. 


The Bethel Seminary. Stockholm, Aug. 
24, 1870.— Almost a year has passed 
since I last wrote, and it may be of some 
interest for me to state a few of the facts 
which during this time have, in the gra- 
cious providence of God, transpired in 
connection with our mission work in Swe- 
den. I shall begin with the Bethel Semi- 
nary. 

The past academic year did not seem 
to open as auspiciously to the school as 


1870.] 


previous ones had done, the entire num- 
ber of scholars being but nine ; only three 
new ones having applied for admittance. 
This was rather discouraging at first, but 
grace and faith triumphed. Our hearts 
were made assured that the ways of God 
are in wisdom, mercy and love, and the 
work of teaching was cheerfully and 
gratefully resumed. 


The Scholars. One of the new scholars, 
an elder in one of our country churches, 
and not far from forty years of age, en- 
tered only on a partial course of one year. 
Of the remaining eight in the school, two 
possessed several years’ experience in the 
field, where they have labored with ac- 
ceptance and success. Three others pos- 
sessed a more limited experience ; the rest 
were beginners. All of them were bene- 
ficiaries. One of the new ones was soon 


found to be unable to pursue his studies, 
probably on account of a sickness of which 
he a few months later died. This left us 
with only eight scholars. We closed the 
academic year on the first of June ult. 


On Public Examinations. The Board 
had previously concluded that the semi- 
nary should not, as hitherto, hold any 
public examination, but merely close off 
with usual class recitations, open of course 
to whoever might desire to attend. The 
principal reasons urged in favor of this 
change were that the yearly public ex- 
amination was uncalled for, as the Sem- 
inary issue no diplomas nor confer any 
degrees ; that such examinations were of 
no essential benefit, either to the scholars 
or the school ; that under present circum- 
stances members of churches, who might 
come up to the city to witness the closing 
exercises, could not for economical reasons 
afford to give their presence during the 
number of days needed to make the ex- 
amination thorough and genuine; and 
finally that unless a sufficient number of 
days could be assigned to make such an 
examination thorough and genuine, it 
would merely tend to make the closing 
discipline of the scholars superficial, and 
thus afford them a temptation to an unin- 
tentional deception of the public. 

My conviction is, however, that a gen- 


Mission to Sweden : — Letter from Mr. Broady. 


443 


uinely thorough examination is of very 
great and essential benefit not only to the 
various interests of an institution of learn- 
ing, but also personally to both teachers 
and scholars. But of course time must be 
given for it to be had, and I hope the day 
may not be so very far distant when even 
we here may find it possible to invite 
visitors from the country to a six-days’ 
yearly examinational stay. As it was, 
the closing this year without a public ex- 
amination passed off as pleasantly as it 
had on previous years, with such a one. 
And visiting brethren present, who in 
number were no fewer than formerly, 
went from class-room to class-room, evi- 
dently feeling and manifesting as much 
interest in the exercises as ever. 


Course of Studies. The subjects pur- 
sued during the year were essentially the 
same as before. Br. Drake had given 
instruction in Arithmetic, Algebra, Geog- 
raphy, Swedish History, General History, 
Church History, Physics and Isagogics; 
br. Nystrom, in the Swedish language 
and Composition, and in Hebrew and 
Greek to the more intellectually endowed. 
I had instructed in the English language, 
Logic, Psychology and Moral Science, 
Biblical Exegesis, Doctrinal Theology, 
History of Doctrines, and Homiletics. 
Br. Wiberg had lectured once a week on 
Pastoral Theology. 

This scheme differs somewhat from the 
one previously sent. — Psychology I have 
taken up only so far as was necessary to 
make the subject of Moral Science more 
intelligible to the scholars. I was necessi- 
tated to transfer the teaching of Isagogics 
to br. Drake, as I could not possibly find 
time to do it myself together with my 
other branches. We thought it best, as 
many desired it, to take up Hebrew again 
into the regular course. Some other 
changes were occasioned by the resigna- 
tion of br. Ostergren, one of our teachers, 
the one who took the place of br. Edgren 
in the Seminary. Br. Ostergren during 
the past winter accepted a call to our 
little church in Upsala, left destitute by 
the return of br. Edgren to America. Br. 
Ostergren’s branches, Arithmetic, Alge- 
bra, Geometry, Geography, Astronomy, 


| 
| 
| 
| 


444 


and Physics, had to be divided between 
brn. Drake and Nystrom. Since these 
two brethren, however, could not take up 
all of these branches in addition to what 
they already had on hand, it was con- 
cluded to drop Geometry and Astronomy, 
as being least necessary, and that br. 
Drake, after he had transferred Swedish 
Language and Composition to br. Nys- 
trom, should take what remained of the 
subjects br. Ostergren had taught. 


Employment of Graduates. Four of 
the eight scholars present at the close of 
the school finished their studies this year, 
and have already entered on permanent 
work in the field. One of them, after 
only one year’s course, has returned to 
the church of his charge in Dalarne, in 
North Sweden. Another, being some- 
what advanced in studies when he en- 
tered the school, after going through a two 
years’ course has also returned to his old 
charge, the church in Hallsberg, one of 
the principal railroad stations in Central 
Sweden. A third has been called and 
settled as pastor over a small, but promis- 
ing church in the city of Carlsham, prov- 
ince of Blekinge, in the south of Sweden; 
quite an important field, and much in 
need of evangelical labor. The fourth 
has also gone down south to Skane to 
labor as a general missionary, especially 
within this province, where we have quite 
a number of churches, in greater part 
destitute of pastors and teachers. Thus 
has the Seminary again been enabled, 
by the blessing of God, to send forth a 
few, who, we fondly trust, are destined 
through Divine grace to become sources 
of good, of spiritual influence and power 
over our land. 

From the regular coursers who went 
out from us last year, we have heard 
nothing but what has given us occasion 
of joy and gratitude. 


Labors of Former Graduaies, Thus 
br. Patterson who settled in Eskilstuna, 
reports a work of grace among his people, 
which has increased the church and 
rendered his chapel too small for public 
worship on the Sabbath. Br. Engstrom, 
who settled over the comparatively large 


Mission to Sweden : — Letter from Mr. Broady. 


[December, 


and important country church in Karsta, 
a few miles north of Stockholm, which for 
several years through internal dissensions 
and carnalities had been losing its influ- 
ence and strength, has baptized twenty- 
three, and been permitted to witness the 
love of God shed abroad among his peo- 
ple, which has healed up the old sores 
and restored the church to more than its 
former influence and power in the com- 
munity. Br. Anderson, who was sent 
out as missionary to the Island of Got- 
land in the Baltic, a field which by reason 
of its great moral depravity and exceed- 
ing narrow-mindedness of the people, is 
perhaps one of the hardest under our 
charge, has nevertheless, in the face of 
numerous difficulties and trials, witnessed 
the triumph of Divine grace and the 
power of the truth as it is in Jesus. Souls 
have been saved, churches strengthened, 
and the friends of God in many places of 
the island much encouraged. 

From the brethren who left two years 
ago, the reports also continue encourag- 
ing. Br. Lindblom left Orebro last 
spring, and has settled as pastor over the 
First Church in Stockholm, where he now, 
under God, is doing a great and good 
work. Br. Backman received the call to 
fill the vacancy in Orebro, which he ac- 
cepted, and where the Lord is blessing his 
labors. The latter did also a good work — 
during the few months he stayed in Norr- 
koping, where he was the means, in the 
hand of God, of lifting the feeble little 
church there out of very great obscurity. 
When he came among them, they used to 
meet in a very small room, situated in an 
out of the way back place, and quite un- 
inviting to all approach. But he left 
them worshipping in a fine large hall in 
the best part of the city, affording room 
at least for three hundred, and on Sab- 
bath days overfilled with people. 

He left Norrkoping for Orebro, as the 
latter is at present the more important 
field of the two. The former place is 
meanwhile to be supplied by another 
brother. Br. Wingren, who went down 


to Skane, has been prospered by the Lord 
in the winning of sonls, in organizing day- 
schools and Sunday-schools, and in de- 
veloping the resources of the churches in 


1870.] 


the province. He just writes me that the 
local Missionary Society, which through 
his efforts was organized only some nine 
or ten months ago, for the purpose of 
evangelizing especially their own large 
province, has already received into its 
treasury about one thousand Rix dollars, 
and has sent out several missionaries into 
the field. 

Of the nine regular coursers whom the 
Seminary has thus far sent out, six are 
supported almost wholly by their respec- 
tive churches, and the remaining three 
are sustained by the mission. 


Review of the Past. In thus briefly 
reviewing some of the results of the labors 
of the school thus far attained, we have 
great reason for gratitude and encourage- 
ment. The Lord has indeed been good 
to us, and we cannot but hope and believe 
that He has still greater blessings in store 
for us in the future. 

Another cause of cheer is that reports 
are coming in from various quarters, in- 
forming us that prejudices are giving 
way, and that the churches are beginning 
to feel more and more confidence in the 
school, and in the cause of theological 
education among us. With this increase 
of confidence and interest, we also begin 
to look for an increase of moral and 
material support. The prospect as re- 
gards the number of scholars for the 
ensuing year seems also brighter than 
usual, as twelve new ones have already 
applied for admittance. Two of these 
are Danish brethren. The others will 
come in as beneficiaries. All of them are 
preachers with more or less experience, 
well known and accepted on wae field and 
among the churches. Should they all 
come when the school opens, we would 
then begin this year with sixteen pupils, 
May the Lord be pleased soon to send us 
some brethren also from Norway and 
Finland, where the demand for laborers 
is, if possible, still greater than among us. 
It seems to me that this Seminary might, 
under God, become the training-school 
for such of the Lord’s servants whom He 
shall see fit to call and send out as lead- 
ing workmen in the countries of Scandi- 
navia and Finland, and thus this place be 


Mission to Sweden : — Letter from Mr. Broady. 


445 


made the centre for Baptist faith and 
practice throughout Northern Europe. 
The Lord’s will be done. 


Support of the Students. As regards 
the support of our beneficiaries, we are 
as yet almost wholly dependent on your 
aid. But it would delight your heart, 
could you see and hear how very grateful 
the young brethren are for the privileges 
they through your generosity enjoy, and 
how warmly and earnestly they, at the 
daily morning service in the school, pray 
for the blessings of God to rest on their 
dear American brethren. We trust also 
that so long as our need here continues 
so great, nothing will occasion you to 
diminish the allowarce hitherto granted 
the school, as well as our mission at large. 
I would on the contrary ask the Execu- 
tive Committee to be so kind as, if possi- 
ble, to increase the allowance to our mis- 
sion. As above stated, on account of br. 
Ostergren leaving us, br. Nystrom’s labors 
in the school have of late considerably in- 
creased, and he thinks that his classes do 
not now get the instruction they need, as 
his present salary does not allow him to 
give them his undivided time and ener- 
gies. 

We concluded at the close of the school 
that we should lengthen the summer vaca- 
tion to three months, instead of two, as 
formerly. The principal reasons were to 
avoid the heat of the month of August, 
and to give the brethren who are to re- 
turn to school, a few weeks longer to 
pursue their labors in the field. Conse- 
quently, the school is to open again, the 
Lord willing, on the 1st of September. 


Change of Location. We have left the 
old rooms which we found to be too un- 
wholesome, and have rented an apartment’ 
of five rooms and a kitchen, on the third 
floor of the house right opposite the 
chapel, on the other side of the street. 
We intend to keep three of the rooms for 
the use of the school, to let out another to 
some of the students, and to give the use 
of one room and the kitchen to some 
sisters of the church, who in return will 
have to take care of the class-rooms, 
keeping them clean and warm. 


| 


446 


A Four Years’ Course of Study. I 
have thought somewhat of the propriety, 
if not necessity of lengthening the course 
of study in our Seminary, making it four 
instead of three years. From the expe- 
rience thus far acquired, I am convinced 
that three years do not suffice to make 
any of our scholars competent to become 
teachers in our school; and yet if our 
young Institution is to become a perma- 
nent affair, and to grow in depth and 
breadth, in influence and _ usefulness, 
which I, under God, hope and pray it 
may, it seems to me we ought to begin to 
look forward to the time when new 
teachers will be demanded, who‘ shall 
come in and take our places when we 
have done. To depend on the Institu- 
tions of the State to furnish our Seminary 
with teachers, I cannot consider wise; as 
in that case our school, even with its 
Baptist faith, would ere long become but 
a miniature copy of the stereotyped theo- 
logical training now furnished by the 
Lutheran Establishment. But this would 
inevitably defeat the very object of the 
school, which, as I conceive it, is to sup- 
ply our mission with a living, energetic 
and sound gospel ministry, and to further 
the dissemination of a genuine and prac- 
tical Christianity. 

Again, to look abroad for teachers, as 
for instance to America, I cannot con- 
ceive of as being either right or expedient, 
because as a general thing, if we except 
the demands made on a land by the 
heathen, each country needs its own men. 
And, besides, he is best qualified to teach, 
whose training has been obtained among 
the people he is going to instruct. Con- 
sequently it remains to us to look to our 
own resources and to make the best of 
these. 

I would not propose that all should go 
’ through the four years’ course, no more 
than all now go through the three years; 
but only to regulate it, so that those 
scholars who by nature and disposition 
seem to be fitted and called to become 
leaders, and teachers, should have the 
best opportunity for preparation that our 
means and resources might possibly afford. 
I throw out these remarks merely as a 
suggestion, and would ask the Committee 


Mission to Sweden : — Letter from Mr. Broady. 


(December, 


to kindly give me their counsel in the 
matter. 


The Preparatory Schools. 1 hope that 
in time we may be able so to arrange the 
instruction in the preparatory or “ colpor- 
teur schools,” that the course in the Sem- 
inary might thereby be considerably 
advanced. But this will of course take 
time. Some few years will yet have to 
elapse before we can get them fairly 
agoing, because they will have to depend 
on the brethren who go out from us as 
pastors, on the locality these occupy, and 
other circumstances. But even when we 
get these subordinate schools to be what 
they ought to be, and what we can rea- 
sonably hope them to be, the Seminary 
will still have to Jengthen its course and 
become more complete, if it is to meet 
such demands as above referred to. 


Providential Disappointment. Brn. 
Wiberg, Drake and myself had made 
arrangements to hold a “ Ministers’ Insti- 
tute” during the vacation, and to open it 
on the 13th of June ult. Kristianstad, in 
the south of Sweden, was decided upon 
as the place. But the day before that on 
which I intended to start, and just as I 
got my family into the country, I was 
prostrated by a very sudden attack of 
pneumonia. The fever was exceedingly 
severe, and the right lung seemed torn to 
pieces. But I felt the grace of God 
precious, and my soul rested in Jesus. 
I cannot, however, but consider it a special 
mercy that I was not taken away from 
my work and my family. But the people 
of God prayed much and earnestly, and 
the Lord was pleased to grant their re- 
quest, and to lengthen the measure of my 
life. I was confined to the bed two 
weeks, and when I got up, my strength 
was gone. I have used the rest of the 
vacation to get recuperated, and to be 
prepared, the Lord willing, for another 
year’s work in the school. 


Health and Labors of Mr. Broady. 
Since I began to be able to do so, I have 
been preaching on the Lord’s day in dif- 
ferent places in the central part of Swe- 
den. My health had all along during the 


1870.] Mission to Sweden : — Letter from Mr. Broady. 447 


spring been quite low; so much so that I 
had to stop preaching in the beginning of 
April, and during the month of May I 
had often to lie down and rest for an 
hour when I got up to my room, after 
having spent one hour in the school. The 
weakness seemed to have its principal 
seat in the chest, and a little cold would 
almost use me up. I thank God that I 
was able to hang on, however, to the close 
of the term. That my originally robust 
constitution should show such symptoms 
of weakness, I cannot but attribute prin- 
cipally at least, to my confining and 
pressing labors in the school. The utter 
destitution of suitable text-books in the 
Swedish language on almost all of my 
subjects, and of books of reference, com- 
pels me to give thgse hours to writing and 
study which I otherwise ought to devote 
to physical exercise, in order to keep my 
body in trim. When to this have been 
added the labors of the Sabbath, it has 
proved more than my body could bear. 
lam not yet certain what course to pur- 
sue in the future, whether I shall preach 
regularly on Sabbath days as before, or 
whether I shall devote them to rest. My 
health seems to demand the latter, my 
heart the former, because my spirit de- 
lights in making known to sinners the 
glorious gospel of Christ. 


Mr. Broady and the Church. Before I 
became so feeble that I had to stop 
preaching, the attendance in the chapel 
continued as numerous as usual. The 
Lord was also pleased to be present, as 
from time to time one after another came 
telling me what Jesus had done for their 
souls). The church had for years been 
greatly in need of a suitable person who 
could devote himself wholly to its pastoral 
care and service. The desire had every 
now and then been expressed, that I 
should accept the office, either leaving 
the school, or in connection with the 
latter. But as I think my labors in the 
school faithfully performed are enough for 
one man, and as I could not at all feel it 
in my heart to give up the school, I had 
always positively and unequivocally said, 
“No.” The Lord has now, however, 
been pleased to remove this want, by giv- 


ing the church last spring the services of 
br. Lindblom, and this just at the very 
time I became unable to preach. Br. 
Lindblom gives almost universal satisfac- 
tion. 

The chapel is well attended, the people 
of God edified, and sinners saved. We 
expect much good from the Lord through 
this brother. Since the church has thus 
received a pastor, who I think is able to 
render them such services as the place 
demands, should I be able to preach on 
the Sabbath hereafter as before, I shall 
then very likely do so in some other part 
of the city. The desire has been strongly 
expressed, both by the pastor and people, 
that I should alternate with him and 
preach at least once every other Sabbath 
in the chapel, br. Wiberg preaching once, 
the intervening Sabbath; but this is a 
measure, the need or the good of which I 
cannot under present circumstances per- 
ceive. But 1 hope the Lord will be 
pleased graciously to show me what He 
wants me to do, as well as to give me all 
needed grace and strength to do it. Pray 
for me. 


Brightening Prospects. Br. Wiberg will 
no doubt furnish a report concerning the 
last annual meeting of the Stockholm As- 
sociation and of the Stockholm Missionary 
Union, as well as concerning the results 
of the last “ Ministerial Institute ” held ia 
Skane. I desire but briefly to state that 
the prospecis among us for the success of 
the cause of Christ are brightening. 

The reports coming in from various 
parts of our land are very encouraging. 


Old churches are strengthened and in-- 


creased, new ones are being established, 
and a sounder Christian Doctrine, accom- 
panied with a sounder Christian life, is 
more and more gaining ground among the 
people of God. Even the secular powers 
are by degrees made to serve the progress 
of the gospel. 


Church and State. Since I last wrote, 
the Diet have passed a law which restores 
to dissenters their political and civil 
rights. But we have not yet got a law 
recognizing dissenters in general, without 
which the former law can be of no use to 


448 Mission to Spain: — Letter from Mr. Knapp. (December, 


us. Still, I cannot believe that it will 
now take us so very much longer, before 
we also get such an one, and which shall 
forever free the brethren from the bonds 
of the State Church and the anti-Chris- 
tian arrogance of a hierarchal priesthood. 
Think of seeing one of the privileged 
castes, as I did some few months ago, at 
the funeral of a deceased member of our 
church, standing by the coffin which en- 
closed the remains of a departed soul, uni- 
formed in his black trailing priestly robe, 
with ritual in his hand and the forked 
white crape strung round his neck, with 
utmost effort striving to keep his balance, 
while with rolling eyes and with the ges- 
tures of the stage, be, with breath stinking 
with brandy, pronounces the last words of 
meant-to-be Christian consolation and 
warning to by-standers, relations and 
friends ; and while your heart turns away 
in utter disgust at the exceeding profanity 
of the occasion, you will have before you 
a living and truthful picture of one of the 
fruits of State-Churchism. 


Persecution. Another kind of apples 
still growing on the same tree, is persecu- 
tion. The other day a mob, instigated 
by the priest of the place, armed with 
sticks and loaded pistols or guns, used 
personal violence on one of our students, 
and drove him out of the country where 
he was preaching, pursuing him for quite 
a distance. Not many Sabbaths ago br. 
Truvé had met a number of people out in 
the open fields, a short distance from 
Gottenburg, for the purpose of preaching 
to them, when the priest of the parish 


‘being present, took both prayer and text 


from Truvé’s lips, preventing the latter 
and preaching himself. Travé, silenced 
and abused, had finally to leave, without 
having had the opportunity of saying 
what he intended to the people. Oc- 
currences like these are, however, excep- 
tional; as a general thing our laborers do 
not meet with any hindrances in their 
work worth mentioning. 


An Encouraging Field. Baptists and 
the doctrines they preach are becoming 
more and more known throughout the 
land, and their Bible truthfulness, if not 


openly, at least tacitly acknowledged, 
This, however, does not lessen the work 
which the Lord has graciously committed 
to us; but in proportion as the field is 
growing wider, and becoming more and 
more accessible, in the same proportion 
increases our felt need of laborers, as well 
as the demand for such from all parts of 
our land. The same is true of Norway 
and Finland. Pray for us, dear brethren, 
that the Lord may be pleased to send the 
much needed workmen into the field, to 
gather in for His own glory this northern 
harvest, so ripe and so inviting. And 
when ye pray, forget not to help us also 
to render thanks unto the Lord for His 
wonderful and untold mercies unto us, as 
a mission as well as a people. 


PAission to Spain. 
LETTER FROM Mr. KNAppP. 


First Baptist Church in Madrid. Aug. 
22, 1870.—I wrote July 28th that I 
hoped to have a Baptist church in full 
operation here by the first of Sept., but 
I have been enabled to do so much 
earlier. On Aug. 3d I called the Pres- 
byterian church together, laid before 
them all the facts in the case, with which 
they were fully acquainted before, and 
asked them to decide by a perfectly free 
vote whether the church should continue 
as a Presbyterian one or a Baptist. The 
vote was unanimous in favor of baptism 
in its true sense. I then asked them to 
dissolve formally the Presbyterian church, 
which they did. Between the 30th of 
July and the 20th of August I have bap- 
tized 38 of the church, and up to the 10th 
of August I had 33 baptized believers. 
It was on that day that 1 called these 33 
together and formed them into a Strict 
Communion Baptist church under the 
name of the “ First Baptist Church in 
Madrid.” They appointed the following 
officers the same night : — 

Wo. J. Knapp, Pastor. 


Rurino BarRRIOs 
CASCAJOSA Deacons. 


Juan Clerk. 
Gomez, Treasurer. 


1870.]} Mission to Germany :— Letter from Mr. Pritzkau. 


The work is now reduced to the follow- 
ing dimensions : — 

The chapel seating 500. 

Boys’ schgol in Calle de Cabeza, 50 
students. 

Girls’ school, 25 scholars. 

All the employees are now Baptists. 

1st Evangelist, — Juan Calleja. 

2d do. — Manuel Curros. 

School master, — Segundo Gomez. 

School mistress, — Maria Morales. 


Trials and Difficulties. It would be 
easy to increase our present number of 
members (38) to 100, if I had a baptistery. 
Those of the better classes object to the 
river very naturally ; for there is no re- 
tired place within a league of the city, so 
that we have had to administer the ordi- 
nance among the laundresses of the Man- 
zanares, who, with their families and com- 
panions, always set up a derisive howling 
very hard to bear, especially when obscene 
language forms the chief ingredient in the 
abuse. Still, this necessity has given me 
several times the opportunity of preaching 
the Gospel to these poor wretches on the 
bank, and many is the attentive listener I 
have had. The season too is advancing, 
and as the water comes down from the 
Guadarrama Mountains, it is extremely 
cold, and the weak frames of this degen- 
erate people, not accustomed to the ‘ di- 
verse ablutions,” react against this sudden 
exposure. You wou'd understand this bet- 
ter if you knew the peculiar insalubrity 
of this climate, in which we all have the 
sore throat two thirds of the year, I am 
in hopes we shall yet be able to buy a 
suitable edifice for permanent use, in 
which all the facilities of baptistery and 
retiring rooms will have a place. 


Right Hand of Fellowship. While I 
was in Paris the last week, I addressed 
the French Baptist congregation and se- 
cured from br. Lepoids the right hand of 
fellowship in behalf of the little Zion of 
the same faith and order in Madrid. We 
are thus recognized in Paris. I sent a 
copy of my tract on Baptism, of which I 
published here 5,000, and it is doing a 
great work, 

VoL. L. 28 


449 


Two Baptist Churches in Madrid. 
Sept. 1. — The first of September finds 
us with two strict Baptist churches in 
Madrid, one (my own) the Lavapies or 
1st church, of forty-eighf members, and 
the other, the Libertad, of forty-two 
members. Thus ninety believers have 
been baptized here in a few weeks, all by 
holding in a little, till the movement pro- 
ceeded ex populo and not from us. This 
Libertad St. church was of “ Plymouth 
Brethren ;” but by dint of incessant la- 
bors I got the leaders to see that a con- 
sistent course was to admit to the Lord’s 
Table only those whom the New Testa- 
ment recognizes as full Christians; and 
now they are doing so and are full of joy, 
working on the “ Baptist Manual ” which 
I have published here. Our work would 
now take very large proportions, if I 
dared advise aggression. Our opponents 
are fierce, but the people are with us. 


HAissfon to Germany. 
LETTER FROM MR. PRITZKAU. 


Missionary Tour — Baptisms. Alt- 
Danzig, June 7, 1870.—On the eighth 
of May, I started for a tour among our 
missionary stations. These are remote 
from one another, and I was absent three 
weeks, during which I had many joyful 
experiences. At Steinberg, May 17, I 
preached to large assemblies and broke 
bread. On Monday, I had the pleasure 
of baptizing into the death of Christ, in the 
presence of many spectators, five converts 
on profession of their faith. After admin- 
istering the Lord’s Supper,I left the 
brethren, hoping that the hearts of the 
members may be bound together in love, 
and that they may do more in future for 
the advancement of the kingdom of God. 


Conviction regarding Believers’ Baptism. 
Several brethren accompanied me to 
Odessa, on my way home. The way led 
us through several colonies of Germans, 
where we met several Christians in heart, 
connected with the national church. In 
some points they do not agree with us. 


| 
| 


450 Mission to Germany: — Letter from Mr. Pritzkau. (December, 


Notwithstanding they gave us a friendly 
reception and manifested brotherly love. 
Particularly was this trae in Alexander- 
feld and Annenthal, where the majority 
of the inhabitants of the village are be- 
lievers. In Annenthal, as well as in 
other settlements, many brethren have 
long been convinced in regard to believers’ 
baptism. The feeling is almost universal in 
this district among the brethren, that it is 
their duty to separate themselves from the 
state church and to form churches of be- 
lievers only, but no one ventures to make 
a beginning. In Annenthal, however, 
some of the brethren were unwilling to 
delay longer to obey the truth, and as I 
was passing through, they desired to be 
baptized. After examination, — which 
was held in the house of the village mayor, 
who, together with his wife, is a believer, 
and both convinced in regard to Scriptu- 
ral baptism, — six candidates were bap- 
_ tized. It was the first time the people of 
the place had ever witnessed a baptism ; 
many were present therefore from curios- 
ity. But everything was quiet during the 
solemn ceremony. 


The Work in Odessa. Lord's day, the 
23d of May, I spent in Odessa, and 
preached twice. The work has been pur- 
sued here by two brethren since last 
Christmas, except that they were once 
complained of before the governor-gen- 
eral. But when he had examined their 
faith, he gave them permission to continue 
the meetings, only enjoining it upon them 
not to allow at their baptisms any offense 
against morality. So the brethren are at 
liberty to hold meetings in Odessa. May 
the work result in the salvation of many 
sinners and bring glory to God. 

Four believing souls offered themselves 
for baptism on this occasion. ‘The breth- 
ren deemed it best, as they had been ad- 
vised to do, to go back to Annenthal, 
which lies on the Black Sea, 30 wersts 
from Odessa. Early Monday morning we 
set out for that village, and enjoyed a 
glorious baptismal feast. Many brethren 
and sisters came together to see and hear. 
Six more candidates were baptized. We 
marched through the village, singing, to 
the place where three days before six 


converted sinners had been “ buried in the 
likeness of Christ's death.” When we re- 
turned to the house after the baptism, the 
hymn was poured forth from swelling 
hearts — 


“ Lord, make my heart an altar fit for Thee.” 
I can never forget that scene. 


Baptisms at Alt-Danzig. On Surd.y of 
the preceding week, eleven converts 
were baptized in Alt-Danzig. 

At the passover in April, we enjoyed a 
rich blessing. Many brethren were with 
us from far and near, — among them br. 
Ondra from Neudorf. The school-house 
where we usually hold our meetings was 
too small, and the brethren resolved to 
hold the service in the church. There 
was preaching in the a. M. by br. Ondra 
and in the p. m. by br. Reigel. The au- 
dience was so large that the church could 
scarcely hold them all. After the service, 
there was a church meeting, when ten 
converts, men and women, were examined 
and received, and immediately baptized. 
Br. Ondra made a brief address at the 
water to the candidates and the assembly, 
founded on Matt. 21: 23-27. Thus the 
first of the passover days was concluded, 
and ten believing souls had “ put on 
Christ.” 

On Monday, the second passover day, 
br. Ondra preached in the forenoon, after 
which the marriage ceremony was per- 
formed. In the afternoon was a love-feast, 
which was protracted till two hours be- 
yond midnight. This was the first time a 
love-feast had been held in this church, 
and everything was spirited and encourag- 
ing. The brethren from abroad spoke of 
the work of the Lord in their own places 
of abode and in their own hearts, thus 
edifying and rejoicing the children of 
God. On Tuesday a conference was 
held from nine till half past one. At the 
close the brethren from abroad spoke a 
few parting words, and the assembly, by 
a standing vote, thanked them for their 
visit. The whole was closed by sing- 
ing — 

“ Brethren, the hand of love receive.” 

We felt in our souls that we were one 
in Christ, and it was, and is still our most 


1870.] 


earnest wish that we may still live to 
Him. It is all the Lord’s doing, and it is 
marvelous in our eyes. We thanked 
God, and felt that the bond of love united 
us more firmly. We separated with the 
wish often to enjoy such feasts, The wish 
was general that the conference might be 
regularly held in future, as a means of 
drawing the brethren in Russia into a 
closer union, 


Lerrer From Mr. N. LARSEN. 


Meeting of the Danish Association. 
The Annual Conference of the Danish 
churches was held in Jetzmark, Jutland, 
June 30 to July 3. The delegates pres- 
ent numbered 18, besides other visiting 
brethren. Br. S. Hansen was elected 
Moderator and br. L. Jakobsen and N. 
Larsen, Clerks. As the missionary work 


is the very soul of the Conference, the 
brethren were first called upon for reports 
concerning the field and their labors in it. 
Three missionaries spoke first, and then 
the pastors of the churches. 

From the reports it appears that peace 


and union prevail in all the churches. 
Some of them have had delightful acces- 
sions, and speak of good prospects for the 
extension of the kingdom of God. Oth. 
ers have had a year of drought, partly 
owing to the want of laborers, and partly 
because the members are so scattered 
that labor for them is extremely difficult. 
The opposition of the church party is felt 
everywhere; but many doors have been 
opened for the truth, and it is hoped that 
as soon as they can be entered, much fruit 
will be gathered for the kingdom of God. 
One of the missionaries, since the Con- 
ference of the year 1869, has held 491 
meetings, and another, 250. In some 
places, particularly in Jutland, often two 
or three meetings have been held on 
week days; they have been well attended 
and we expect to see some fruits. 

Ia many of the churches there are day 
schools, attended by the children of the 
members, and which have enjoyed a Di- 
vine blessing. .One brother has given 
eighty dollars to promote the interests of 
these schools. In many places there are 


Mission to Germany : — Letter from Mr. Larsen. 


451 


very interesting Sabbath-schools, partic- 
ularly in Copenhagen and Veile. That 
in Copenhagen numbers about seventy 
scholars, besides older pupils from 14 to 
24 years of age. These are instructed by 
the pastor, br. Koebner. In Veile there 
are 45 pupils. 


State of the Churches. The impression 
derived from all the reports is that the 
Lord is with us, and that He calls upon 
us for renewed activity in His vineyard. 
The history of our missionary efforts ren- 
ders this very evident. Three years ago 
we resolved to support two missionaries. 
A friend had promised us something, and 
we trusted that with an effort we could 
raise the remainder, The missionaries 
therefore were appointed, when at once 
it appeared that we were to have no more 
money from this beloved friend, so that 
we must collect double the sum we had 
anticipated, We hope the Lord blessed 
us in our work. But now it seems nec- 
essary for br. Koebner to go to England 
again to make collections. 


Topics of Discussion. The other pro- 
ceedings of the Conference had reference 
to the school for training preachers, — 
which must not be allowed to fail, — the 
care of souls, the examination of brethren 
who are called to preach, regeneration, 
election, and things concerning chiefly our 
church duties and relations. There was 
mnch discussion on regeneration, but not 
much on election. We found ourselves, 
I trust, not far from the standard of truth. 
May the Lord guide us into all truth, for 
the glory of His holy name. 

We had full meetings every evening. 

-On the Sabbath morning following the 
Conference, our meeting was held in a 
large barn, and we had numerous hearers, 
In the afternoon we had a love-feast. At 
two o’clock, in the prese..ce of about 300, 
after preaching, we celebrated the Lord’s 
Supper, and the Lord was near us and 
blessed us. We had the pleasure of sing- 
ing hymns of praise out of the new Danish 
Hymn Book prepared by br. Koebner. 
And now to the eternal God, Father 
Son, and Holy Ghost, be honor and glory 
forever, Amen. 


452 Miscellany: — The Character, etc., of Missionaries. 


(December, 


MISCELLANY. 


THE CHARACTER AND INFLUENCE 
OF MISSIONARIES. 


The Rev. E. E. Jenkins, M. A., for- 
merly missionary in India, said at the 
Wesleyan Missionary Meeting in London : 
It has been said by journals of great au- 
thority that missionaries are, for the most 
part, illiterate men, who have a peculiar 
talent for embarrassing governments and 
impecing civilization. I do not think that 
the history of the promulgation of Chris- 
tianity in India will support that very 
charitable estimate of the missionary’s 
worth. As for the first charge — Who 
translated the Bible into fifteen Indian 
languages? The missionaries. Who are 
the authors of the best grammars and 
lexicons that illustrate and expound those 
languages? Beschi, and Yates, and 
Winslow — missionaries. Who were the 
pioneers of the researches which, under 
Wilson and Max Miller, have brought to 
light the treasures of Pali and Sanskrit ? 
Yates, and Gogerly, and Spence Hardy 
— missionaries. Who have contributed 
to literature the most minute and trust- 
worthy accounts of the manners, the cus- 
toms, the religions and the castes of the 
Hindu races? The missionaries. Who 
are the leaders in that intellectual crusade 
against the tyranny and the ruthless in- 
tolerance of the old Brahminical system, 
that vast superstructure of error, which, 
thank God, is now nodding to its fall? 
Not Chunder Sen and his colleagues, but 
the missionaries. So much for their want 
of scholarship and culture. I will only 
add, therefore, in refuting the charge of 
illiterateness, that Medhurst and Morri- 
son, of China, Ellis, of Madagascar, and 
your own Calvert, of Fiji, have given as 
good an account of the progress of edu- 
cation in their respective missions, and of 
their own share in it, as I can do of the 
missionary’s part in the education of In- 
dia. The policy of all the great mission- 
ary bodies in India has been a policy of 
instruction. They avow as their para- 
mount aim the conversion of the natives 


to Christ. Were they to conceal that — 
were they, in attempting to conform to 
the Christless morality of the age, to keep 
their Master in the background, whatever 
they migbt call themselves, they would 
cease to be Missionary Societies. But 
with the dogmatic preaching of the Cross 
the Indian missionaries have ever associ- 
ated the systematic education of the 
young and the welfare of popular litera- 
ture. 

When our political journals and secular 
Indian reformers are specifying, as an in- 
stance of the regeneration of India, that 
the natives have changed their views on 
female education, and that schemes for 
the elevation of their women are being 
projected and carried out by the people 
themselves, it must not be forgottea that 
the first attempts to overcome native 
prejudice on this subject were made by 
missionaries ; that they first succeeded in 
establishing female schools; that with re- 
spect to the stubborn controversy which 
has now ended in victory for woman’s 
rights, the burden and heat of that great 
fight were borne by missionaries ; and to 
the elevating sentiments of social justice 
as against the tyranny of priestly tradi- 
tion, which are now fermenting the native 
public opinion, the leaven of those prin- 
ciples was hid in the native mass by mis- 
sionary hands. Several of those reforms 
in the law of inheritance and property, 
which are now conferring a boon on all 
classes of the Hindus, were first carried 
out to meet the exigencies of Christian 
converts. In fact, look where I may 
upon the various.and comprehensive im- 
provements in the mental and civil con- 
dition of the people, in the legislation of 
the government, and in the productive 
resources of the country, my difficulty is 
to find a single beneficent change which 
does not bear upon it some impress of 
missionary labor. I said missionary la- 
bor ; not missionary intermeddling with 
politics; not missionary gunboats, but 
legitimate missionary work, the diffusion 
of that Gospel in whose hand, over and 


> 
. 
. 


1870.] Letters from 


above the great salvation which it is her 
highest mission to grant, is every other 
good and perfect gift, both for a man and 
for a nation of men —good laws, good 
maxims for rulers, good examples for 
subjects, and the best inspiration for the 
duties of life. So much for the charge 
that missionaries embarrass governments. 

I am almost ashamed to have mar- 
shalled together facts so obvious to sup- 
port an argument with which you must be 
so familiar; but I have ventured these ob- 
servations to re-state the position of the 
missionary character, — against those who 
either asperse it as mischievous, or would 
put it aside as having no place among 
the really regenerating forces of the pres- 
ent age. Sir, it is a light thing for us to 
be judged of man’s judgment, for He that 
judgeth us is the Lord ; but while we 
shall allow no earthly judgment to pre- 
scribe our task, or define our course, or 
settle the value of our work, we do not 
despise the judgment of men. So far as 
India is concerned, we are thankful for 


Missionaries. 453 


the inspection of criticism. We challenge 
the government, the press, and the obser- 
vation of those eminent persons who oc- 
casionally visit the East from Europe and 
America, to examine the quality of our 
Indian work, to visit our stations, to in- 
spect our schools, to read our publica- 
tions, to walk over our Christian villages, 
and to declare frankly whether we do not 
as a whole bring light with us into the 
dark places of the country, whether we 
do not stir the deadly torpor of supersti- 
tion by the breath of a healthy intellec- 
tual agitation, whether we do not in any 
given neighborhood induce the people 
to repudiate many destructive errors, 
and relinquish many shameful practices ; 
whether the word which we preach does 
not make the people who hear it more 
amenable to the laws of civil reform. 
The fact is, the progress of missionary 
labor through the populations of India is 
the track of a river through the desert, 
and everything liveth whithersoever that 
river cometh. — Christian Work. 


BURMAH. 


Mavtmarn. — J. M. HAswe t, June 18, Aug. 
9, — J. R. HASWELL, June 30, Aug. 5 (2).— 5. 
B. Rann, July 6, 7. 

Tavoy.— J. F. Norris, June 2. 

Suwayerren. — N. Harnis, Apr. 6. Mrs. 
H., Aug. 3. 

Touncoo. — E. B. Cross, June 11, Jaly 18, 
25, Aug. 29. — Mra. C., June 10 — A. BUNKER, 
Juty 18, Aug. 2L. — J. N. CUSHING, July 9, Aug. 
18.— Mrs. C., July 2. 

Rangoon. —E. A. Stevens, July 18, 24, 
29, Aug 8. —J. Wave, June 10.—I. D. 
Burn, Juce 7, 14, Aug. 8. —R. B. Hancock, 
Vet. 18. — Mrs. INGALLS, May 24, 29, June 12, 
Jnlv 4 (2), Aug. 18, 25.— Miss ADAMs, June 
23, 28. 

BassErn. — C. H. CARPENTER, Mav 24, Tune 
10, July 26, Aug. 3. — M. Jameson, July 20. — 
Mrs. VAN Merer, May 20, June 6, July 7, 27, 
Aug. 18, 24. -—- Miss GAGE, Aug. 31 ° 

Henraapa. —A. RK. R. Craw try, May 24, 
June 28, July 4, Aug. 29.—D. A. W. Surrn, 
June 20, July 80, Aug. 1. W. GrorGe, Aug, 
29 


Prome.—E. 0. Stevens, June 23, July 27, 


ASSAM 


J. Sropparp, July 28, Aug. 16.— E. W. 
Crark, July 28, Aug. 10, 31.—Mrs C., July 
7.—M. Bronson, May 27. _ Mrs. Scorr, June 
9, July 9, Aug. 30. — Miss Bronson, May 20, 
Aug. 25. 


LETTERS FROM MISSIONARIES. 


SIAM. 

Wm. Dean, May 18, June 6, 8, 22, July 28, 
(2), Aug. 1, one no date. —S. B. PARTRIDGE, 
June 7, 23. — Miss Freipr, May 18, 20, July 5, 
Sept. 2 — Miss Dean, June 22. 

TELOOGOOS, 

L. Jewett, Julv 18, Aug. 11, Sept. 2, 17. — 
Mra. J., July 8. — J. E. Aug. 6.—J. 
McLavriy, June 4 — E. Butiarp, Aug. 31. 

CHINA. 

W. Asumore, July 4, 29, Sept. 5, Aug. 1. — 
J. R. Gopparp, July 6, Aug. 5. — H. Jenkins, 
June 28, July 9, Aug. 8. 

FRANCE. 

A. Dez, Sept. 8 (2). — V. Lerorps, Sept. 9. 
— J. B. Crertin, Sept. 23. — F. Lemaire, Aug. 
= — A. Canor, Sept. 16.—M. Vincant, Aug. 

GERMANY. 

J. Korsyer, July 31. 

SWEDEN. 

K. 0. Broapy, Aug. 24. — T. Trove, Oct. 3. 

—P. PAcmauist, Sept. 8, Oct. 13. 

SPAIN. 
W. I. Knapp, Aug. 1, 11, 22, Sept. 1, 4, (20, 
21, 26. 

AFRICA. 

J. T. Ricwarpson, Aug, 8, Sept. 1, 22,. — J. 
W. Cravers, June 23, Sept. 27. 


| 
| 
| 

30, 


DONATIONS .RECEIVED IN OCTOBER, 1870. 


MAINE, 


Jefferson, ch., 5; Warren, Ladies’ 
Bap. For. Mise. Soc., Mrs. E. A. 
Richardson tr., 12; 

Waldo Asso., fr. an old friend 

Waterville, Ist ch., of wh. 20 is fr. 

, tow. sup., of Adiram, nat. 
pr., ‘care Rev. M Brovuson, Now- 
gong, Assam, J. W. Philbrick tr., 

Hartfi.rd and Ea. Sumner, ch. 

Kennebec Asso., Rev. W. H. Clark 


tr. 

Penobscot Arso., J.C.White tr. , Old- 
town, ch. 
wh. &0 is fr. 8. 8., 1385; Ist ch., 
Fem. Miss. Soc. 30; Etns, ch. 12} 
Hampden, Ist ch. 4; Stetson, ch. 
6; Hodgdon, ch.7 ; Kenduskeag, 
ch. 4; Lincoln Centre, ch. 23.50 ; 
Houlton, ch., of wh. 13. 75 1s fr. 
8. 8., 30. 47; ; Amity and No. 11,17; 
Ludlow, ch. 5; estate of D. Herrick 
3: re at Asso. 28. 18; Littleton, 


ch. 7 
Coll. per Rey. James French, Dist. 


eC., 

Hancock Asso., miscellaneous 9.30 ; 
Sedgwick, 1st ch. 17. 10; 

Cumberland Asso., Pertland, 1st ch., 

pulpit supply 


NEW ITAMPSHIRE 


Claremont, T. J. Harris 

Na-bua, Ist ch., Dea. Stephen Whip- 
ple tr., 112.26; a friend 30; 

Hopkinton, ch., 8. 8., tow. sup. of 
Bible reader, care Mrs. Hi. L. Van 
Meter, Bussein, Burmeh, 

Coll. per Rey. James French, Dist. 
Se 


C.. 

Milford Asso., Hudson, ch. 5; New 
Boston, ch 1. ; Mason Village, ch. 
15; Lyndeboro’, ch. 2; Manches- 
ter, Ist ch 5890; Merrimac St. 
ch., of wh. 25 is to be expended in 
care of Key. 1. J. Stoddard among 
the Garos, 45; Wilton, ch. 24; 

Merrimac River Asso., No. Sanborn- 
ton, ch. 

Portsmouth Aeso., Deerfield, ch. 

VERMONT 

Townshend, ch., per Rev. D. L. Bray- 
ton. 

Wilmington, friends 2.45; West 
Wardsboro’, Mrs. A. Moree .60; 
per Key. M. J. Knowlton, 

Vt. Bap. State Convention, E. A. 
Fuller tr , Enosburgh, ch. 2.75; 
Grafton, Mrs. C. M. White 1; St. 
Albans, Mrs. Duclas 3 

Windbam Co. Asso., 8. H. Sherman 


Coll. per Rey. Jemes French, Dist. 


Sec. 

Woodstock Asso., Saxton’s River, 
ch , to be expended by Miss A. R. 
Gase in her sch., Toungoo, Bur- 
mah, 76; Perkinsville,ch 1; Lon- 
donderry, ch. 3.50; 

Barre Asso., Shxron, ch. 3; Roches 
ter, R. Holbrook 2.50; 

Wingham Co. Asso. , Jamaica, ch., 
J. ©. Robinson 

Lamoille Arso., Hinesboro’, ch.,8.8., 
for Karen hormal sch., Base . 
Burmab, 


7; Bangor, 2d ch., of 


26 40 
20 00 


10 00 
142 26 


25 00 


80 50 
5 60 
1 00 


600 190 37 


MASSACHUSETTS. 


Chicopee, a friend 


1 
Westboro’, ch. 27.10; |Marshfield, 


North ch., L. Dorman tr., 9; 
East Brookfield, ch., Geo. Forbes 
tr. 

Newton, Upper Falls, ch. 5; Newton 
Centre, roc. of Miss. Inquiry of 
Newton Theo. Inst., F. H. Eveleth 
tr., 14. 

Miller’s River Asso. ,G. W. Dexter tr., 

Lowell, Ist ch , Dea. J. A. Brabrook 
tr. , 80; levi Keere, to const. Rev. 
N. Mallory H.L. M., 

South Scituate, Rev. D. B . Ford 10; 
Mrs. D. B. Ford 10; Angela B. 
Ford 4; Chauncy D. Ford 8; 
Edith Ford 1; 

Taunton Asso , A. J. Barker tr., 
Swansea, ch. 8; Rehoboth, ch. 
2.50; Raynham, ch., Miss. Soc. 73 
Coll. at Arso. 25. 91; 

Foxboro’, ch., of wh. 16.20 is fr. La- 
dies’ For. Miss. Soc., tow. educat- 
ing nat. pr. 

Salem Asso., 'H. Haddock tr., Mar- 
blehead, ch. 28; Beverly, ba ch. 
29; Rockport, ch. 16. 50 ; Salisbury 
and Amesbury, ch. 86 55; Dan- 
versport, ch. 35.17; Wenham, ch. 
89; Rowley, ch., addl. 18; Man- 
chester, ch. 20; 

Westfield Asso. ,K. Chase tr., Gran- 
ville, cb. 

Middlefield, Mr. and Lyman 
Church, per Rev. M. L. Bickford, 

Woburn, Bap. Miss. Soc., tow. sup. 
of student in Theo. Sem., Rangoon, 
Burmah, 

Boston, a iriend 20; a friend to mis- 
sions 1; 

West Acton, ch., J. M. Brown tr., 

Salisbury, Sarah T. Osgood 

Coll. per "kev. James Dist. 


Sec 

Old Colony Asso., Hanson, ch., 8. 8. 
12.50; Middlebero’, $d ch.6; Car- 
ver, ch. 2.50; Marshfield, ist ch. 
13.25 ; Miss J. H. Hl. Hooper 2; 
Miss M. Yondell 6, 

Taunton Asro., Acushnet, ch., Rev. 
R. Hunt 

Boston So. Asso., Randolph, ch. 

Merrimac River ” Atso., Chelmsford, 


[st ch. 
RHODE ISLAND. 


Providence, Coll. at Roger Williams 
Chapel, per Rev. A. 'T’. Rose, 


CONNECTICUT. 


Conn. Bap. State Convention, W. 
Griswold tr., North Lyme, ch. 
26.15; Henry Holman, 10; Hart- 
ford, So. eb. , mon. con. coll. 56; 
Plainfield, Union ch. 15 50; Tol- 
land, ch. .£0; Stafford, ch. 5; 
Mansfield, ch 18.30; 

East Cornwall, a friend 


NEW YORK. 


Ontario Asso., N. K. Cole tr., Ben- 
ton, ch 9 0; Bethel, ch. 3; Mid- 
diesex, ch. 6; Bristol, ch. 8.50; 
Canandaigua, ‘ch. 8; 

Yates, individuals 8; Lodi, ch. at 
North Hector 54.03; Albany, Tab- 
ernacie ch., pulpit supply 20; per 
Rev. M. J. Knewlton, 


42 25 


10 00 
93 30 


24 50 1,983 00 


8 84 


454 Donations. [December, 
000 00 
17 00 
1 80 
39 10 
107 60 
5 86 19 31 
5 75 82 
5 80 
130 00 
. 28 00 
88 41 
819 15 
90 59 
272 22 
85 00 
— 25 0 
21 00 
8 50 
6 00 
145 90 
50 
11 21 334 87 
63 20 
295 
6 75 
181 45 
800 184 45 
| 
| 80 00 
| 
§2 08 


1870.) 


Oneida Asso., H. Habel! tr., 
Norway, ch., to be expended in care 
of Mrs. H. L. Van Meter, Bassein, 
Burmih, ‘ 
Hoosick, ch. P 
Coll. per Rev. O. Dodge, Dist. Sec., 
Rensselaerville Asso., Berne and 
Knox, ch 20; Greenville, ch. 10; 
New Baltimore, ch. 3; Gayhead, 
ch. 8; Preston Hollow, ch. 10; 
Rensselaerville, ch. 16; South Dur- 
ham, ch. 5: Westerlo, ch., of wh. 
12.20 is fr. For. Miss. Soc., and 18) 
fr. S. 8., 24; Coll. at Asso. 40; 
Essex ani Champlain As-o-, Keese- 
ville, ch., in part, 26; half coll. at 
Asso. 28.50 ; 
Franklin Asso., Croton ch. 22; 
Oneonto, ch. 7.50; both io part, 
Hudson River So. Asso., New York, 
a friend 50; Mr. and Mrs. Geo. 
Bliss 10; 
Long Island Asso., Greenport, ch. 
11551; East Marian, ch. 11.31; 
Oyster Bay, ch. 16; Huntingdon, ch. 
6.80; Cold Springs, ch. 7; all in 


part, 

Madison Asso., Hamilton, ch., mon. 
colls. 

Coll. per Rev. J. B. Pixley, Dist. 
Sec 


Wayne Asso., Rose, ch., bal. 10.50; 
Williamson, ch. 2; Marion, ch., 
tow. sup. of nat pr., care Mrs. M. 
B. Ingalls, Thongzai, Burmah, 68 ; 
Walworth, ch. 6; C, P. Patterson 
50; Coll at Asso. 27.06; 

Seneca Asso., Watkins, ch., of wh. 
6 is fr. 8. S., 1001; Covert, ch. 
20; Mecklenburg, ch. 11; Tra- 
mansburg,ch., of wh. 20is fr. 8.58, 
6109; Farmerviilage, ch., of wh. 
4.44 is fr. S. 3 , 6.94; Enfield, ch. 
4; Romulus, ch., of wh. 10 is fr. 
8. S , 58.75; Ithaca, ch., 8. 8. 14; 
Ovid, ch., 8. 8. 5; Beunettsburg, 
ch., 8. 3. 7.15; fr. ‘Treas. of Asso. 
8; Coll. at Asso., 21.47; 

Monroe Aso., Parma, Ist ch. 21 60; 

2d ch. 13.70; Brockport, ch. 2; 
Greece, ch. 5; Rev. J. F. Bliss and 
wife 200; Clifton, ch. 66.50; Uni- 
ted Henrietta ch. 8; West Henri- 
etta, ch. 29; Bergen, ch. 6; Ham- 
lin, ch. 9.25; Webster, ch. 14; 
Mumford, ch. 11.50; Oyden, ch. 
30; Penfield, ch. 89; Rochester, 
German ch. 10; Sweden and Ber- 
gen, ch. 6; Fairport, ch. 36.45; 
Churchville, ch. 8 ; 

Buffalo Asso., rec. fr. tr. 


PENNSYLVANIA. 


Philadelphia, Mrs. C. A. L.a monthly 
contribution, and with prev. donas. 
to const. Mrs. Ruhama Putnam 
H.L.M., 

Waverly, A. W. Calkin 

Coll. per Rev. J. V. Ambler, Dist. 


Northumberland Asso., coll. 17.°6; 
Lewisburg, ch. 47.65; Danville, 
ch., 8. 8. 5.86; 

Philadelphia Asso., New Britain, ch. 
9.25; Ridley, ch 4.07; Montgom- 
ery, ch. 19; Philadelphia, Shiloh 
ch. 5.50; a friend 3; 2d ch. 32; 
Enon, ch. 9.76; Lawrenceville, ch. 
10; Ist German ch., 8. 8. 10; Mr. 
Pickel 2; Lancaster, ch. 4.50; 

Russell Hill, ch. 2.50 , Braintrim, ch. 
8.20; Katon, ch 9.80; Coll. at 
Bridgewater Asso. 7.67; Wyalu- 
sing, ch. 5; Bennie Rossell’s mite 
box 3.40; Peter’s Creek, ch., 8. S. 
5; Huntingdon, ch. 5.06; Salem, 
ch. 6.25; Mahoniog, ch. 12; 


63.88 295,53 


NEW JERSEY. 


Coll. per Rev. O. Dodge, Dist. Sec., 

East New Jersey As-o, Newark, 
Fairmount ch. 10; Samptown, ch., 
bal. 3.50; 

Coll. per Rev. J. V. Ambler, Dist. 


Vineland, ch. 10.25; Rev. 0. Wilber 
10; Greeawich, ch. 6.85; Jacobs- 
town, ch. 70.50; 


DELAWARE. 
Wilmington, Ist German ch. 


WEST VIRGINIA. 
~~ per Rev. Thomas Allen, Dist. 


Union’ Asso., half Coll. at Asso., 
18.05 ; half coll. at State Coaven- 
tion 9.63 ; 


ALABAMA. 
Demopolis, Miss Addie Ely 


OHIO. 
be per Rev. Thomas Allen, Dist. 


Auglaize Asso., Lima, ch. 

Cleveland As+o., Cleveland, 3d ch. 
55; Columbus, ch., 8. 8. 4.41; 

Miami Asso., Cincinnati, 9th St. ch., 
8.8., tow. sup. of Nar. pr., care 
Rev. Wm. As.imore, Swatow, 
China, 

Miami Union Asso.. Springfield, 1st 
ch. 70; Trinity ch., in parr, 2 25; 

Maumee Asso., Mill Creek, ch. 

Portsmouth Asso., Ironton, ch.,8. 8. 

Seueca Asso., half coll. at Asso., 

S:raight Creek Asso, New Market, 
ch.,8. 8. 

Mill Creek Asso., Mt. Zion, ch., 8. 8., 

Zanesville Asso., Zanesville, Ist ch , 
8.8., for sup. of studenc in Rev. 
J.G. Binney’s sch., Rangoon, Bur- 


maa, 
Zoar Asso., Coll. at Asso., 


INDIANA. 


Olive Branch, ch., Eliza Hunter 
Coll. per Rey Thomas Allen, Dist. 


Sec., 
Bethel Asso., Livonia, ch., 8. 8. 
Bedford Asso., Bloomington, ch. 
Brownstown Asso., Seymour, ch. 
Fort Wayne Asso., Coll. at Asso., 
Harmony Asso., 
Vippecanoe Asso., 
Northern tnd. Asso., Kingsbury, ch. 
White Lick Asso., Plainfield, ch. 


ILLINOIS. 


Coll. per Revs. 8. M. Osgood and C. 
F. Tolman, Dist. Secs., 

Bloomfield Asso., Bethel, ch. 3; Tus- 
cola, ch., Miss M. L. Halsted, tow. 
sup of nat. pr, care Mrs. A. K. 
Scott, Nowgong, Assam, 10; 

Bloomington Asso., El Paso, ch.. 
Mrs. M. M. Bowers, tow. sup. of 
pupil in Mrs. A. K. Scott’s sch., 
Nowgong, Assam, 

Carro!lton Asso., Greenfield, ch., M. 
Dickerman 

Chicago Asso., Benton, ch. 

Edwardsville Asso., Voll. at Asso., 
per Rev. N. Butler, 

Fox River Arso., Chicago, Wabash 
av. ch., 8. 8., earnings of Miss 
Moore's class of little girls under 
12 years of age, tow. sup of pupil 
in Mra. A. K. Scott’s sch., Now- 
gong, Assam, under direction of 


97 10 110 60 


22 283k 


SESESEERS 


15 00 


Donations. 455 
169 63 | es 
5 25 
13 50 
| 
| 
» | 
5 
54 50 | 
29 60 
| 4 
| i 
60 00 | 27 68 
| 
| 60) 
155 | 
10 00 
| 69 41 
| 
168 56 | 100 
| 72 
12 
7 
7 
| 
| 
216 41 i 
| 6 
| 
| 
| 
| 
505 00 | 
4.00 1,687 01 | 
| 
1.6 28 
59 00 
2 00 
| 
| 13 00 
70.57 
| 
10 00 | 
149 
| 8 
109 08 | 
26 v0 | 
| 
| | 


456 


Rey. R. E. Neighbor, 20 ; Downer’s 

Grove, ch., Rev. J. N. Hobart 30; 

Sandwich, "eh., 8. 8., tow. sup. of 

student in "normal sch. , Ongole, In- 

dia, care Rey. J. E. Clough, 12.50 ; 

. River Asso., Chillicotbe, ch., 
Mrs Kent 

Louisville Asso., Blue Point, cb., for 
Mies., 8; Greenland, 
c 

Otrawa Asso., Deer Park, ch. 10; 
Marseille, ch. 3; 

Quincy Arso., Coll. at Asso., for Mrs. 
A. K. Scott's work, Nowgong, As- 
sam, by Rev. T. Ww. Goodspeed, 
25.76; Griggsville, ch., of wh. 45 
is fr. S S. tow. sup. of Mon, in 
Mrs. A K. Scott's sch. , Nowgong, 
Assam, 50; Payson, ch. , of wh. 10 
is fr. Miss Scott, 25; Pleasant 
View, ch. 10; 

Salem Asso. , Macomb, ch., Mrs. L. D 
Benedict 

South Dist. Asso., Belleville, ch., tow. 
sup. of Rev M. Jameson, Bassein, 
Burmah, 


IOWA. 


Coll. per Revs. 8. M. Osgood and C. 
F. Tolman, Dist. Sees., 

Burlington Asso., Burlington, ch., 
Miss L. C. Stormer5; Mt. Pleasant, 
ch., Miss 8.8. C 3; Spring Creek; 
ch., Mra. Rebecer Heuna, tow. 
sup. of Rev. I. J. 8. ‘ard, Gowai- 
para, Axsam, 5 ; 

Cedar Valie ey Asso., vanesville, ch., 
Dea. Alvah Coddington, to const. 
himself H. L. M. , 100; Waverly, 
ch., Mrs. Rosina Risdon 1; 

Central Iowa Asso., Coll. at Asso. 
bal. 11.60; Des Moines ch., a 8., 
tow. sup. of pupil in Mrs. a 
Scott’s sch., Nowgong, 

Towa Valley Asso., Tama City, ch. 

Oskaloosa, Asso. , Agency City, ch. u 
Ashland, ch. 1; Pella, ch., Rev. J 
Edoinster 5; 

Southwestern Asso., Harlan, ch., C. 
T. Ramsay 

Upper Des Moines Asso., Boonsboro’, 
ch., Wm. Moffatt 5; Dennison, ch., 
tow. sup. of pupil in Mrs A K. 
Scott’s sch., Nowgong, Assam, 
13.25 ; 

Washington Asso., New Haven, ch. 

Western Iowa Asso. , Jefferson, ‘ch. 


MICHIGAN. 


Coll. per Revs. 8S. M. Osgood and C. 
¥. Tolman, Dist. Secs., 

Flint River Asso. , Fenton, ch. 

Grand River Asso. , Ada, ch, 5.85; 
Alpine and W alker, ch. 5; Ensle' 
Centre, ch., 8. 8., Miss F. E. Stil- 
well 2.55; ‘Greenville, ch., 8. 8. 
4.40 ; Palo, ch. 2; Paris, ch. 1.50; 
Portland, ch. 17; Rockford, ch. 
16; Spring Lake, ch. 6.60 ; 

Jackson As‘so.. Sandstone, ch. 

Kalamesco River Asso. , Trowbridge, 
ch. &. 8., by tr. of Convention, 

; West Lerov, ch. 5; 

Lenawee Asso., Morenci, ch. .60, 
Rome, Ist ch., by tr. of Conven- 


tion 

Michigan’ Asso., Detroit, Ist German 
ch. 2.5%; Lafayette Av. ch., Miss 
Myra Hodge 5; Memphis, ch. 5; 
Mt. Vernon, ch. 6.30 ; 

Shiawassee Asso. , Coll. at Asso., by 
tr. of Convention, 9.60; O’K emas, 
ch., by do., 

Joseph's River "Asso. Buchanan, 

h 1; Niles, ch. 28. 04; 

&t. Valley Asso., Baldwin’s 
Prairie, ch. 2; Sturgis, ch. 1; 
White Pigeon, ch. 


110 76 
5 00 


81 00 


60 80 
18 25 


14 68 


4 60 


18 80 


12 10 
29 04 


4 00 


Donations. 


291 16 


— Apple River Asso., coll. at 


Aeso., Ann Arbor, ch., 
of wh. 16.25 is fr the Young Peo- 
ple’s Miss. Asso., tow. sup. of Rev. 
I. J. Stoddard, Gowalpara, Assam, 

Wayne Asso. , Coll. at Asso., by Rev. 
J. Morrison, 6.31; Commerce, 
ch. 10; Hadley, ch. 1; Highland, 
ch. 42; Novi, ch. 4; ‘Plymouth, 
ch. 75 Redfor?, ch. 10; Salem, ch. 
16.08 ; 


MINNESOTA. 


Coll. per Revs. 8. M. Osgood and C 
F. Tolman, Dist. Secs., 

Minn. Asso., Coll. at Asso. 25.64 ; 
Minneapolis, ch., 8. 8., tow. sup. 
of nat pr., care Rev. J. BE. Clough, 
Ongole, India, 64; 

Mion. Central Asso., Fairbault, ch. 
5; Wasioja, ch. 1; 

Northern inn Apso , Coll. at do., 
2.55; Anoka, ch. "2.50; Maple 
Grove, ch. 2; 

Sonthern Minn. Asso., St. Charles, 
ch. 


MISSOURI. 


Coll. per Revs. 8. M. ae and C. 
F. Tolman, Dist. Sees. 

Old Path Asso., coll. by" Rev. L. J. 
Tatum 

8t. Louis Asso., St Louis, 2d ch. 1; 


WISCONSIN. 


Coll. per Revs. 8S. M. Osgood and C. 
F. Tolman, Dist Secs., 

Lake Shore Aeso , Milwaukee, Syca- 
more St. ch., 8. 8., tow. sup. of 
Geo. B_ Davidson, student under 
Rey. J. K. Clough, Ongole, India, 
12.50; Sheboygau Falls, ch., Rev. 
A. T. Miller 19; 


KANSAS. 


Coll. per Revs. 8. M. Set and ©. 
F. Tolman, Dist. See 

Kast Kansas Asso. Coll, ‘at Asso. , by 
Rev. E. Gunn, 

Kansas River Aseo., Ottawa, ch., 
8. 8., tow. sup. of Mary Meeker, in 
Mrs. A. K. Scott’s sch., Nowgong, 


Assam, 
Mound City Asso., coll. by Rev. John 
Smith 


CANADA. 


T. S. Shenston 
1,82 in gold 
Coll. per Rev. "J. B. Pixley, Dist. 


Sec., 

Boston, ch. bal. 18.37 ; Burch’s Cor- 
ner, ch., bal. 27.17;'A. N. Barber 
10; ’ premium on above coll. 3.50 ; 


LEGACIES. 


New Bedford, Mass., Capt. Wm. If 
Vinal, per Lavinia A. Vinal and 
Geo C. Hatch, Exrs 

Strykersville, N. ¥., Charles Richard- 
son, per C. H. Richardson, Exr., 
in part, 

Newark, N. J. Miss Mary rae 
A.C. Wheaton, Exr., bal 


Donations and Legacies from April 1 
to Oct. 1, 1870, 


Donations and Legacies from April 1 
to Nov. 1, 1870, 


[December, 1870. 


59 58 


822 34 


108 69 


es 


9 60 


81 50 


12 60 


25 00 
1100 «648 60 


1,494 91 


59 04 1,°53 95 
266 82 


500 00 


125 00 
19 2,412 19 


$10,679 01 
43,455 92 


$54,184 93 


| 
| 
ana | 28 25 
| by | 
13 00 96 
| 89 64 
7 06 
7 00 
| = 
| — | 


1870, 


22 34 


3 69 


Missionary Magazine Advertising Department. 


A DOZEN REASONS 


WHY THE 


PAIN KILLER 


MANUFACTURED BY 


PERRY DAVIS & SON 


Is THE 


Best Family Medicine of this Age, 
And why it should be kept always near at hand: — 


Ast. PAIN KILLER is the’most certain Cholera cure that medical science has produced. 
2d. PAIN KILLER, as a Diarrhoea and Dysentery remedy, is unequaled. It seldom, if ever, fails. 
8d. PAIN KILLER will cure Cramps or Pains in any part of the system. A single dose usually effects a 
cure. 
4th. PAIN KILLER will cure Dyspepsia and Indigestion, if used according to directions. 
6th. PAIN KILLER is an almost never-failing cure for Sudden Coids, Coughs, etc. 
6th. PAIN KILLER has proved itself a Sovereign Remedy for Fever and Ague, and Chill Fever ; it has cured 
the most obstinate cases. ‘ 
7th. PAIN KILLER, as a Liniment, is unequaled. For Frost-Bites, Chilblains, Burns, Bruises, Cuts, 
Sprains, etc., no Physician can do more than it. 
8th. PAIN KILLER has cured cases of Rheumatism and Neuralgia after years’ standing. 
9th. PAIN KILLER will destroy Boils, Felons, Whitlows, Old Sores, and Swelled Joints, giving relief from 
Pain after the first application. 
10th. PAIN KILLER cures Headache, Toothache, and Pains in any part of the body. 
llth. PAIN KILLER will subdue that agonizing pain almost instantly, whether internal or external. 
12th. PAIN KILLER will save you days of sickness, and many a Dollar in time and Doctors’ Bills. 

PAIN KILLER is a purely Vegetable preparation, safe to keep and to use in every family. The simplicity 
attending its use, together with the creat variety of diseases that may be entirely eradicated by it, and the 
great amount of pain and suffering that can be alleviated through its use, make it imperative upon every 
person to supply themselves with this valuable remedy, and to keep it always neur at hand. 

The PAIN KILLER is now known and appreciated in every quarter of the globe. Physicians recommend 
it in their practice, while all classes of Society have found in it relief and comfort. 

Give it a trial. Be sure and buy the genuine. Every Druggist, and nearly every Country Store Keeper 
and Grocer throughout the land, keep it for sale. 


PERRY DAVIS & SON, 


MANUFACTURERS AND PROPRIETORS. 


PRINCIPAL DEPOT: Providence, R. I. 
WESTERN BRANCH: Cincinnati, O. 
EUROPEAN BRANCH: 17 Southampton Row, London, England. 
DOMINION BRANCH: 380 St. Paul Street, Montreal, C. E, 


1 
SS 
| 
Yay 
| 
60 


2 Missionary Magazine Advertising Department. 


LUNG BALSAM 


IS: THE REMEDY THAT CAN SHOW 


More Genuine Evidence of Merits than any other Balsam or 
Cough or Lung Remedy ever offered to the Public. 


No stronger warranty can be given for the merits of a LUNG BALSAM than we offer. We say to 
all who wish to use ALLEN’S LUNG BALSAM, that, unless it gives entire satisfaction, they may return the 
bottle to us after they have used it forty-eight hours, and the money will be cheerfully refunded. This same 
warranty has been offered from the day we offered the BALSAM first for sale, and to this time, the first bot- 
tle has not been returned, and we have received nothing but praise in its favor from those who have ured it. 


Extraordinary Cure of Bronchitis and Consumption. 


GENTLEMEN : — I feel it my duty to let you know the extraordinary healing properties of Allen’s L 
Balsam, not only for your own sake, but for those who are suffering with Consumption, that they may 
know that there is one remedy which will cure after the physicians have failed. My daughter was attacked 
with Bronchitis, which b so firmly settled upon her lungs, that after trying three different physicians, 
for eighteen months, they all failed tocure her. At this crisis, we procured of your agent, at Newton, Mr. 
David Felter, Allen’s Lung Balsam, by which, after the use of three bottles, she was restored to 
health ; and it has now been some six months since, and she has had no return of the disease. We feel 
grateful to the inventor of the remedy which has restored our daughter to health, and saved her life. 

: Yours, respectfully, - ISRAEL HALLSED. 

This is to certify that the above facts, in regard to the cure ute | Bie, are true in every particular. 

. D. WILLIAMS 
Produce Dealer, 206 Sixth Street Market-space, Cincinnati, 0. 


24 Years Afflicted with Asthma and Bronchitis — Doctors and 
Medicines Fail te Cure— Allen’s Lung Balsam Cures 
after all others Fail. 


J. N. HARRIS & CO.:— 

Ses, —- In taking up one of your Almanacs, I read of the wonderful cures by the use of ALLEN’S 
LUNG BALSAM. I was suffering much at the time with Asthma and Bronchitis. I thought I would a 
bottle of it. I did so, and was relieved in a few days, so that I could sit up. I think it will cure me alto- 
ther. Iam sixty-five years of age. It is now twenty-four years since I have been so afflicted, and I have 
mn doctored by many different physicians ; have also taken a number of bottles of Jayne's Expectorant ; 
and I have never taken anything that has done me so much good as your LUNG BALSAM. On Friday, the 
25th ult., I thought I was dying, but as soon as I took your LUNG BALSAM, it relieved me, and I have been 

getting better ever’ since. ° With much gratitude 

MRS. AMY KENNEDY, 
—_—_ Painesville, Ohio. 


Letter from the same Lady. 


GENTLEMEN : —I cannot express the gratitude I feel. I have never taken any medicine that has done me 
half the good that ALLEN’S LUNG BALSAM has. I have not felt as well for many years. J am so much 
better that I wanted you to know it; and I thank you many times for the benefit your medicine has been to 
me. Yours, with much respect, . AMY KENNEDY. 


We copy the following interesting letter from Dr. Harris to the Middlebury, Vt., Register : — 

Mr Eprror : —It is only to subserve the interests of h ity that I request a short space in your valua- 
ble paper to inform the public what Allen’s Lung Balsam is sure todo. Two years ago, I was attacked 
with a severe cold ; it settled in my throat, which so affected the organs of speech that I could not 6 
aloud for nearly six weeks. I got through the winter, coughing nights almost incessantly, with cold night 
sweats, and increased irritation, which extended into the bronchial tubes, and which kept me coughing ail 
summer. I was at Shoreham on a professional visit the past October, when the “‘ good Samaritan ” came 
along, introducing ALLEN'S LUNG BALSAM into New England. TI procured a bottle and took it according 
to directions, and found immediate relief. I have now taken two bottles, which have entirely cured me. For 
the last two years, or during the time of my affliction, | was in a state of constipation, which the BALSAM 
has most effectually regulated. No family should be without this valuable medicine. I see by the Western 
papers that the physici of Cincinnati, where the medicine is manufactured, are introducing it into their 
practice, and I have no doubt it will soon become a classical remedial agent for the cure of all diseases of the 
Throat, Bronchial Tubes, and the Lungs. NATH. HARRIS, M. D., Dentist. 

Middlebury, Vt., November 16, 1866. 


Dr. Harris has for over twenty years been a respected resident of Middlebury, Vt. 


SOLD BY ALL DRUGGISTS. 


Missionary Magazine Advertising Department. 


A NEW TEXT-BOOK. 
OUTLINE 


S/R WILLIAM HAMILTON'S PHILOSOPHY. 


A TEXT-BOOK FOR STUDENTS. 
J. CLARK MURRAY, 


Professor of Mental and Moral Philosophy, Queen’s University, Ontario. 


WITH AN INTRODUCTION 
By Rev. JAMES McCOSH, LL. D., 


President of Princeton College, N. J. 


12mo. Cloth. $1.50, 


The object of this work is to provide a convenient Text-book in Philosophy. The labors of Sir William 
Hamilton as a ag wey formed generally the most powerful influence in the philosophical education of those 
who came withio their reach ; and a similar influence has extended into wider circles through his writings. 
It seemed, therefore, that his philosophy might still be made a valuable instrument of philosophical culture. 
The chief difficulty in the way of this, lay in the selection of one of his works, suitable for use as a Text- 
book. A very slight acquaintance with these is sufficient to show that none of them by itself presents a com- 
plete view of his philosophical opinions in systematic order. 

This felt want has been supplied in Professor Murray’s “‘ Outline of Hamilton’s Philosophy.” 


GOULD & LINCOLN also publish 
HAMILTON’S LECTURES, embracing the and Locicat Coursss; with 
Notes, from Original Materials, and an Appendix, containing the Author’s Latest Development of his 
New Logical Theory. Edited by Rev. Henry Lonauevitte Manszu, B. D., and Joan Verrcn, M. A., of 
Edinburgh. In two royal octavo volumes, viz. : — 


I. METAPHYSICAL LECTURES. Royal Octavo. Cloth. $3.50. 
II. LOGICAL LECTURES. Royal Octavo. Cloth. $3.50. 

G. & L., by @ special arrangement with the family of the late Sir William Hamilton, are the authorized 
American publishers of this distinguished author’s Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic. 

The above have already been introduced into nearly all our leading Uolleges. 


Atso, NEW EDITION — BAMPTON LECTURES. 

PROPHECY A PREPARATION FOR CHRIST. Bampton Lectures ror 1869. 
By 2. Saave Gane, D. D., Regius Professor of Divinity, and Canon of Christ Church, Oxford. 12mo. 
Cloth. -75. 

A work of marked ability and of great interest. 

PROGRESS OF DOCTRINE IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. Bampron Lezc- 

tures. By Tuomas Denany BeRnakD, Exeter College. 12mo. Cloth. $1.50. 
Ge A masterly production. 
Ua Copies sent by mail, postage free, on receipt of the price. 


AUNT MATTIE’S LIBRARY. 4 vols., viz.. Merry Crristmas, Fun 
Sunpay Scnoots, Dairtina Goopwarp. With Illustrations. Price $3. By Marraa J. 
Play School Stories.” 


Auso, NEW EDITION OF 
THE STILL HOUR} or, Communion with God. By Austin Puetps, D. D., Pro- 
fessor in Andover Theological Seminary. 
A fine edition of this charming devotional work (of which nearly fifty thousand copies in the ordinary 
style have been printed) is issued in a square 16mo form, tinted paper, bound in bevel board, full gilt, to 
meet the demand for copies in extra style for presentation. Price $1. 


PUBLISHED BY 


GOULD & LINCOLN, 
69 Washington Street, Boston. 


8 | 
— AND PRorrr, 


4 Missionary Magazine Advertising Department. 


BAPTIST SABBATH-SCHOOL BOOKSTORE. 


ANDREW GRAVES, 
20 Cornhill, Boston, 


Would inform his friends that he still keeps on hand one of the largest varieties of 


SABBATH-SCHOOL LITERATURE, 


ADAPTED TO 


Baptist Sabbath-schools, 


to be found. He has the publications of the 
American Baptist Publication Society, 
American Tract Society, 
Congregational Publishing Society, 
Gould & Lincoln, 
Sheldon & Co., 
Henry A. Young & Co., 


and those of all other Booksellers and Publication Societies publishing Books suitable for Baptist schools. 
Books coming from doubtful sources are carefully examined before recommending to Sabbath-schools. 
He keeps on hand a large variety of 
QUESTION BOOKS, SINGING BOOKS, REWARD CARDS, etc. 


Superintendents, and any others interested, will do well to call upon him before purchasing Library Books. 
Sold at Wholesale Frice. 
Mr. GRAVES has also on hand 
FAMILY BIBLES. 


Also, small Bibles, School and Miscellaneous Books, Toy Books, Games, 
Stationery, etc. 


SERMON PAPER OF ALL KINDS. 
His assortment of 


EXoliday Goods 


I8 LARGE, AND JUST SUCH AS WILL BE WANTED. 


New Books Fublished by 
A. F. GRAVES, 


NO. 20, CORNHILL, BOSTON. 


THE SUNSHINE SERIES. 
By H.N. W.B. Six volumes. Illustrated. 18mo. $3. The volumes of this series are : — 


Honeysuckle Oottage. a and his Harp, 

The Little Florentine. y Top-Boots. 

The Load of Chips. Sophy the Gipseys, 
AMY GARNETT. 16mo. Illustrated. $1.25. 


JOE AND THE HOWARDS. i6mo. Illustrated. $1.25. 


LITTTLE ADDIE’S LIBRARY. By Cousin Bette. 12 Volumes. 


Addie’s Coun Vol. 7. Addie’s Brother 
2. Addie’s New “ Vol. 8. Working for Papa. . 
Addie’s Visitors Vol. 9. Addie’s Birthday 
. 4. Laura’s Garden Vol. 10. The Magic Lantern. 
" Vol. 11. The Sail on the River. 


Vol 
Vol 
Vol 
Vol 
6. The Lost Child. . 
Vol. 12. Addie’s Party........ $8.00 


Missionary Magazine Advertising Department. 


AMERICAN 
ORGAN 


ge Contains all the Valuable Improvements thus far effected 
in Reed Instruments. 


It is especially noted for its full and sonorous quality of tone, arising from 


THE RESONANT AIR CHAMBER, 


which has long been its prominent feature. The reeds are made to imitate a great variety of mu- 
sical instruments, and the mechanical stops afford ample facilities for combination and contrast 
of qualities, and for producing the necessary 


EXPRESSIVE EFFECTS. 


A beautiful Solo Stop, the KALOPHON, has just been added to the double-reed instru- 
ments. 


Having the longest experience of any Eastern House, and possessing unsurpassed advan- 
tages for manufacture, the Messrs SMITH confidently offer their instruments to the musical 
public, and solicit the most rigid comparison in regard to 


TONE, SOLIDITY OF CONSTRUCTION, 


AND 


EXTERNAL ELEGANCE. 


Desirous of meeting the popular demand for a Good Instrument at a 
LOW PRICE, they have with great care designed and 
made a few NEW STYLES, with all solid excel- 
lences and in cases of 


New and Tasteful Designs, 


AT PRICES RANGING FROM 


GS1LOO to $200. 


These Instruments cannot be Surpassed by any of thelr Class, either in 
QUALITY or BEAUTY. 


*,* An elegantly Illustrated CIRCULAR, containing descriptions and prices of 
over 30 styles, will be sent, post-paid, on application. 


8. D. & H. W. SMITH, Boston, Mass. 


| 
5 | 
THE | 
| 
| 


Missionary Magazine Advertising Department. 
GREAT SUCCESS! 


American Sunday-school Worker. 
TERMS FOR 1871. 
J. W. McINTYRE, St. Louis, Publisher. 


A Monthly, 32 pages octavo, for Parents, Teachers, and Scholars, with Sunday-school Lessons, Exposition, 
publicet depth irituality in the Sunday-schoo king 
is publication to op & and e Sunda’ 1 work, loo! 


PRICE $1.50 PER YEAR, IN ADVANCE. 


Sixty Lesson papers free to all clubs of 10. 
Lesson papers, per 100, 75 cents ; less number, one cent each. Clubs of 20, without lesson papers, $1.25 
each. To Specimen copy and list of lessons for 1871 sent on receipt of postage stamp. 


AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSIONARY UNION. 


SPECIAL NOTICES. 
OVERLAND LETTERS. 


The Treasurer makes up his foreign mail on Tuesday of each week, when the letters, that may 
have been sent to the Rooms for that purpose, with the official vorrespondence, are mailed. On 
letters to China and Siam the postage is 36 cts. per half ounce, and on those to India, Burmah, 
and Assam, 30 cts. per half ounce, all via Marseilles. When there are several letters to one ad- 
dress, a saving can frequently be made, so that 20 cts. will meet the average expense. 

It is desirable that the friends, sending private letters to missionaries, prepay their postage, as 
otherwise it is‘properly chargeable to the missionary. Letters sent to the Rooms, to be forwarded, 
should therefore be inclosed in an envelope, directed to F. A. Smith, Treasurer, 12 Bedford Street, 
Boston, with 20 cts. for the postage, and they will be forwarded with the first mail for the station 
designated. 

BOXES AND PARCELS FOR MISSIONARIES. 


There are no regular opportunities of sending out goods, as ships sail at uncertain intervals; 
but, in general, it is well to send packages to the Rooms as soon as prepared, that they may be 
ready for the first ship. Care should be taken, in making up parcels, packing boxes, &c., to 
prevent damage of goods from placing too near them articles liable to be affected by extreme heat 
or other change of climate. 

Whenever goods are sent for missionary stations, advice thereof should immediately be given to 
the Treasurer by mail, describing the box, or package, sufficiently for him to identify it. A general 
schedule of the contents, with the valuation, should also be given, as these are necessary for insur- 
ance, as also for Custom House and shipping purposes. Particular attention is called to this point, 
as for want of it much trouble has often been experienced. 


FORM OF A LEGACY. 

I also give and bequeath to The American Baptist Missionary Union, dollars, for the 
purposes of the Union, as specified in the Act of Incorporation. And I hereby direct my executor 
or executors to pay said sum to the Treasurer of said Union, taking his receipt therefor, within 
—— months after my decease. 


FORM OF A DEVISE OF REAL ESTATE. 


I also give, bequeath, and devise to The American Baptist Missionary Union, one certain lot of 
land with the buildings thereon standing — [ Here describe the premises with exactness and particu- 
larity] —to be held and possessed by the said Union, their successors and assigns forever, for the 
purposes specified in the Act of Incorporation. 


| 


Missionary Magazine Advertising Department. 7 


DESTINED TO BE THE STANDARD BIBLE COMMENTARY IN 
AMERICA. 


THE UNABRIDGED AND ENLARGED EDITION 


DR. WILLIAM SMITH’S 


DICTIONARY OF THE BIBLE. 


The Original English Edition reproduced without mutilation, text and illustration 
complete, with manifold textual errors corrected, and important additions 
made under the direction of the two MOST COMPETENT 
Editors in America, 


HORATIO B. HACKETT, D. D., 


EZRA ABBOT, LL. D. 
In Four Volumes 8vo. Cloth, $26.00. 


HURD & HOUGHTON, 
13 Astor Place, New York. 


H.0. HOUGHTON & CO,, Riverside Press, Cambridge. 


The American Publishers take pleasure in announcing to the large Bible-studying class of the community 
the completion of the work upon which they have been engaged for four years past. The importance of the 
interests involved, and the conscientious care of the Editors, have compelled a slow succession of the num- 
bers, but the work is now done, and they do not hesitate to claim for the Dictionary a place at the head of 
Bible Dictionaries in the English tongue. Its superiority to the English edition of the same work is apparent 
to the most casual observer, and that work has hitherto held the chief place of honor. It will doubtless be 
long before a work appears of this character, representing the scholarship of Christendom, and the acumen 
and good taste of the most fuir-minded men in the English and American churches. 

The work is sold by subscription, and Agents are reminded that this work is BEYOND COMPETITION, 
and that it requires no argument to prove its claim when a person has made up his mind to get the BEST 
book on the subject. 

Single purchasers can obtain the Work by applying direct to the Publishers, 


HURD & HOUGHTON, 13 Astor Place, New York, 
H. 0, HOUGHTON & Oo., Riverside, Cambridge, Mass, 


TWO OPINIONS WORTH NOTING. 


(FROM REV. ROSWELL D. HITCHCOCK, UNION THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY, NEW YORK.) 
Messrs. Hurp & Hovanron : — There cannot well be two opinions about the merits of Smith’s Bible Dic- 


tionary. What was, to begin with, the best book of its kind in our language, is now still better. 
Yours truly, ROSWELL D. HITCHCOCK. 


[FROM REV. WILLIAM G. T. SHEDD.)} 


T have examined the first volume of Hackett’s edition of Smith’s Dictionary of the Bible, and find that it 
makes good the promises of the prospectus. The revision of the English edition has been careful and judi- 
cious, and the new matter is a substantial addition to the work. The purchaser of this American edition 
= the whole of the original the afforded by the lapse of time 

new investigations, at much less cost. equally good sty execution. 
WILLIAM @. T. SHEDD. 


| 
| 
| 
OF 


Missionary Magazine Advertising Department. 


THE CHILD AT HOME. 
First. Plain Edition. 
An Illustrated Religious Paper for Children and Sabbath-schools, 
Each number contains four or more elegant illustrations, a beautiful hymn, with music, curious 


Bible questions, or other Bible recreations, and interesting stories for children from well-known 
and favorite writers. 


TERMS PER ANNUM IN ADVANCE. 
Single Copies, $0.30 ; Eight Copies, $1.00; One Hundred Copies, $12.00. 


SECOND. COLORED EDITION. 


Is elegantly printed in several brilliant Oil Colors, and is the only periodical thus printed in this 
country. 


TERMS: Single Copies, 50c.3 Ten Copies, $4.00; Twenty-five Copies, $7.50 3 
One Hundred Copies, $30.00. 


SPLENDID PREMIUMS GIVEN FOR CLUBS FOR THIS EDITION. 


THE CHRISTIAN BANNER. 


A Religious Paper for General Distribution. 


IT CONTAINS 


Evangelical Narratives, Counsels to the Unconverted, Arguments 
in Defense of Gospel Truth, Religious Intelligence, Summary 
of Current Events, and Advocates Temperance. 


IT IS THE BEST FAMILY PAPER FOR THE PRICE IN THIS COUNTRY. 


TERMS: Single Copies, 35c.; Five Copies, $1.00; ,Twenty Copies, $3.50 3 
Forty Copies, $6.00. 


The above periodicals are evangelical, and strictly undenominational. 


a Let every Sunday-school that does not now take them, send for Specimen 
Copies before ordering elsewhere. 


AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 


164 TREMONT STREET, BOSTON. 


I 
1 
re 


- Tue Correspondence of the American Baptist Missionary Union is conducted by 
the Rev. Jonan G. Warren, Secretary forthe Foreign Department, and Rev. J. N. 
Murpock, Secretary for the Home eae 

Freeman A. Smit, Esq., is Treasurer, to whom communications ceatetalig money 
for the Treasury should be addressed. Remittances by draft or check should be drawn 


in his favor. 
Missionary Rooms, 
12 Bedford Street, 
BOSTON, MASS. 


DISTRICT AGENCIES. 
Districts. District Secretaries. 


EASTERN DISTRICT. 
The New England States ‘Tuy Home Secretary, 12 Bedford Street, 


CENTRAL DISTRICT. 
a New York, and East New Jersey Rev. Orrin Dopner, 498 Broadway, N. Y. 


_ WESTERN NEW YORK. 
Western New York {Rar B. Prxiey, Albion, Orleans Co., 


SOUTHERN DISTRICT. 
West New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and all Rev. J..V. Amsier, 580 Arch Street, 
south of these States oo Philadelphia. e 


MIDDLE DISTRICT. 
Ohio, Indiana, and West Virginia ...... ...- Rev. Tuomas ALLEN, Dayton, Ohio. 


WESTERN DISTRICT. 


Michigan, and all the States except Indi- } Rev. §.M. Oseoop, 17 Custom House 
ana, west of ) Rev. C.F. Torman, Place, Chicago. 


THE HOME WORK OF FOREIGN MISSIONS. 


1.—A Monthly Missionary Sermon by every Pastor. 
2.— A Missionary Periodical in every Family. 

3.— A Stated Contribution from every Christian. 

4.— A Penny-a-week Collection in every Sabbath-School. 
5.— The Missionary Concert of Prayer in every Church. 


The system, embracing these five things, is simple, economical, 
practicable. It has been proved; and when universally adopted, the 
Missions will have all the means needed to supply every want. 


| Americar Baptist Missionary inion. 

| 

| | 

| | 


The Standard Sewing Machine of the World. 


If you want the best SEWING-MACHINE, 
buy a 


WHEELER & WILSON 


Silent Feed, Lock Stitch, 


i They execute MORE RAPIDLY, and with LESS NOISE, than any other Machine in use. 


They operate equally well on every variety of material, and are not liable to get out of order. Competent 
judges, who have used the different machines, recommend the WHEELER & WILSON’S above all others fer 


every kind of Practical Sewing. 
H. C. HAYDEN, Agent. 
New England Office, 228 Washington Street, Boston. 


A Quarter of a Century in the Tennasserim 
Provinces. 


THE STORY 


WORKING LIFE. 


WITH (SKETCHES OF TRAVEL IN 


EUROPE, ASIA, AFRICA, AND AMERICA. 
AS RELATED BY HIMSELF. 


By FRANCIS MASON, D.D, 


WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY W. R. WILLIAMS, D. D. 


ONE VOLUME 12mo. CLOTH. ILLUSTRATED. - - - $2.00. 


Sent by mail prepaid on receipt of price. 


OAKLEY, MASON & CO., Publishers, 


NEW YORK. 


| 4 

ANE 


Subscribers in Arrears 
for the Misstonary Magazine are earnestly requested to remit 
the amount due before the 10th of December, that we may begin 
the New Year and New Series of the Missionary MaGazine 


with a “clean Ledger.” 
sq@> Brethren, please respond promptly. 


= DO YOUR OWN PRINTING 


WITH A 


The Best Press ever made for the purpose, and Second to 
none for the use of GENERAL JOB PRINTERS. 
They are most admirably adapted for BUSINESS Printing, for CHURCH, SA BBATH-SCHOOL, and 
SOCIETY work, and also for MISSIONARY and EDUCATIONAL purposes, 
or for a VILLAGE NEWSPAPER and JOB OFFICE. 
Price of Presses, $15, $30, $32, $50. 


Send for Catalogue, with testimonials and specimens of Plain and Colored Printing done on the Press, to 


BENJ. 0. WOODS, Manufacturer, 351 Federal St., Boston, Mass. 


CHRIS. C. THURSTON, 16 College Place, New York. 
L, & LUDWIG, 917 Market St., Philadelphia, Pa. 


KELLY, HOWEL 
A. C. KELLOGG, 65 West Van Buren St., Chicago, Ill. 


MISSIONARY MAGAZINE FOR 1871. 


The Fiftieth Volume of the MisstonaAny Macaztnx will be completed with this number. 
ImpRovEMENTS. — Important changes are to be made in the new series, commencing with Jan- 


uary, 1871. 

New History. — It is proposed to publish in the new series of the Magazine, in an attractive 
style, a complete Illustrated History of Baptist Missions, as a serial, which shall contain the 
interesting facts and incidents buried up in old pamphlets, books, and papers, so that when people 
have read it through, they will be thoroughly informed on this important subject. 

GENERAL INTELLIGENCE. —It is proposed to have in the Magazine a department for an eccle- 
siastical record, of removals and settlements of ministers, ordinations, deaths, dedications of meet- 

-houses, recognitions of churches, also incidents and facts worthy of preservation for reference, 
d the interests of education throughout the world. ‘Ihe 
be produced are solicited to enrich its general intelli- 


in 
relating. the progress of Christianity an 
most valuable aad brilliant gems that can 
gence depository. 

Rares. — Although we are about to add largely to the expense, we shall not add to the price of 
the Magazine, as we expect an increase in the circulation more than sufficient to compensate for 
increase of expenditures. As a further inducement to increase the circulation, we propose club 


prices at reduced rates, as follows: — 
Ten copies to one address, with the cash. ......+ 75 cents each. : 
Four copies. $1.00 each, and an additional copy FREE. 
Single 1.00 
low price, a readable [llustrated History of Bap- 


the men who have done the most to elevate us as 


Now is an excellent time to secure, at a ver 
f the countries where missions have been estab- 


tist Missions, which includes a description © 
a denomination, together with the condition o 
lished. 

When knowledge can be obtained so cheaply, is it not inexcusable to be ignorant? We might 
as well have lived before printing-presses were invented, as not to avail ourselves of their advan- 
others who read this, will not only take the — them- 
Address, 


t We hope that Dey an 
selves, but help to introduce it into the families with whom they are associated. 
MISSIONARY MAGAZINE, 
12 Bedford Street, 


BOSTON, MASS. 


— 
Lye PNOVELTY JOB PRINTING PRESS, 


Whole Number @ 


THE 


MISSIONARY MAGAZINE. 


PUBLISHED BY THE 


American Baptist Missionary Union. 
DECEMBER, 1870. 


CONTENTS. 


AMERICAN Baptist Missionary UNION. | Work of Native Preachers... eeessee 442 
| Liberality of the Converts.. . 442 
TELOQGOO Mission. — Letter from Mr. Clough... 484 | Mission To SwepEn.. — Letter from ir. Broady. . 442 
Whole Villages turning to Jesus..... 434 | The Bethel Seminary...... 442 
Three Hundred awaiting Baptism............. 434 , The Scholars.......... oO deccccceearess 443 
Need of the Theological 434 Course of Studies.,........... 
Letter from Mr. McLaurin..... Employment of Gradvates........ 444 
Personal Mercies received.............. Labors of Former pe 445 
Importance of Theological Instruction........ 485 Review of the Past...... sccccsrdeccccccoesces G45 
Continued Baptisms. . 485 Support of the Students................ 445 
Baptism — Renouncip Idolatry........ Change of Location.......... 
Home Questions for C Christians 485 A Four Years’ Course of Study........ 
Giving Good Evidence. 436 The Preparatory Schools. ..... 446 
Mission To Karens. — Letier Rand.... 436 Providential 
Karen School in Maulmain................+++ 436 Health and Labors of Mr. Broady............ 
Karen Building near 436 Mr. Broady and the Church. 
State of the Churches. ..... Brightening Prospects 
The School needing 487 An Encouraging Field. .......... . 448 
Sickness of a Native Preacher................ 487 | Mission To Spain. — Letter from Mr. Knapp... «oe 448 
Want of Preachers...............- First Baptist Church in Madrid............... 448 
Proposat ror a Hiner Institution oF LEARN- Trials and Difficulties. ........ HO 449 
ING POR THE KaRENS oF BURMAH........ 437 Right Hand of Fellowrhip. 449 
Mission To Burmans.— Letter from Mr. Haswell. 438 Two Baptist Churches in Madrid, ............ 449 
Visit to K’Mahwet........ 488 | Mission To Germany. — Letter from ‘Mr. Pritz- 
Spirit of Persecution.... ......... .. 489 Missionary Tour — Baptisms............ seeee 449 
Candidates for Baptism.. .. 489 Conviction regarding Believers’ Baptism 449 
A Growing Work..... ee .. 489 The Work in Odessa. ............-050005 ..» 450 
Baptiem at Maulmain.. . 439 Baptisms at Alt-Danzig os -» 450 
Caunese Mission or BANGKOK. — Letter Dr. Letter from Mr. Larsen.......... 461 
- 489 Meeting of the Danish ‘Association. . 451 
439 State of the 461 
The Rich King............. ° -. 440 Topics of Discussion, .........-..6eeeeeeeees 451 
iting the Members,........ /ELLANY. 
Tempted by his Wile............ 441 nats 
Five Chinese baptized ............. - 441 | The Character and Influence of Missionaries ... 452 
A Little Child shall lead 441 | Lerrers FROM MISSIONARIES. 453 


BOSTON: 
MISSIONARY ROOMS, 12 BEDFORD STREET. 
1870. 


Cambridge: Printed at the Riverside Press. 


Vol. L.—No, 12, 
| 
| | 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| | 
| 
«(ll | 


: 
ory 
. 


