THE 


MISSIONARY MAGAZINE. 


Vou. L. — FEBRUARY, 1870. — No. II. 


AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSIONARY UNION. 


TRIP FROM TOUNGOO TO MONAL 


By Rev. J. N. Cusnuine, Rancoon, BurRMAnH. 


(Continued from page 7.] 


Visit to the Tsaubwa. Feb. 14, 1869.— This morning I paid a visit to the Tsaubwa. 
He is a young man, with a handsome, intelligent face. His mind was evidently prejudiced 
against the truth; for his remarks, though polite, indicated his disbelief. His residence, 
for it cannot be called a palace, was very prettily made. He had the usual parapher- 
nalia of office about him. The courtiers were attentive to the preaching. 


A Bold Disciple — Burman Official. My heart received much gratification during 
this visit, from the quiet, firm declaration which Sang Myat made of his faith in Christ. 
He had been reading the “ Golden Balance,” and explaining it, when the Tsaubwa 
suddenly inquired, “ To what Shan State do you belong?” He replied * To Monai.” 
The Tsaubwa then asked in a slightly sarcastic tone, “ Do you believe in and worship 
Jesus Christ ?” He answered firmly, amid the tittering of many of the spectators, 
“Yes.” I hope that God has called this young man to preach salvation to his people. 
He gives tokens of much promise. May God keep him. 

As it was bazaar day, persons were present from all the surrounding villages. The 
assistants improved this excellent opportunity, and were busy preaching and distribut- 
ing Shan tracts both at the zayat and at the bazaar. During the afternoon, a high 
Burmese official arrived from Mokme, with his two hundred Burman soldiers, on his 
way to Ava. His approach was announced by the beating of a gong. Soon we saw 
the golden umbrella flashing in the sunlight, as his lordship approached on an ele- 
phant. A more noisy, brawling company could scarcely be found. The Tsaubwa of 
Mokme rebelled and joined the Mingoon prince. When the latter fled to British Bur- 
mah, the Tsaubwa fled to Zimmay. The king has now pardoned him and granted 
him permission to return, if he will pay the tribute of the past three years, which is in 
arrears. With this state of affairs, the Burman force now returns home. Were the 
Shans only united, this beautiful land might be free. Burman supremacy would end 
forever. 


Burmese Justice — Interested Hearers. This evening we witnessed a specimen of 
Burmese justice. The Burmese official who arrived to-day, commanded his men not 
VOL. L. 8 


34 Trip from Toungoo to Monai. (February, 


to use their fire-arms. Some of them disobeyed. They were brought before his zayat 
and placed upon their knees. One man seized the head and bent it down, while 
another laid the blows upon the bare back with a rattan. One man, who was an un- 
der officer, was pounded with the elbow. This produces more painful bruises. 

15. — Leaving the road which I travelled last year, we turned southward. Aftera 
long and tedious journey over mountains which were very difficult, we entered the 
Tsaubwaship of Merng Sit, and halted near the village of Ho Yang, where the mother 
and sisters of one of my followers lived. He had not seen them for ten years, and the 
reunion was exceedingly happy. All his relatives came to see us. The people here 
listened with earnest attention, and made me promise to remain with them over night 
on my return, so that they could hear more about the new religion. 


New Karen Tribe. Our afternoon march was over a region inhabited by a Karen 
race called by the Shans Yang Sets. The women wear the characteristic Karen tu- 
nic. With them this has alternate stripes of red and white running up and down the 
whole length. They are producers of silk. Though professing to follow Gaudama, 
they worship nats and kill animals. The Shans therefore regard them as very heter- 
odox. As our beds fell intoa stream of water, we were obliged to stop at an early 
hour to dry them before evening came. 

This Tsaubwaship is in a very unsettled state. Here is the same tale of sanguinary 
feuds. The Tsaubwa was killed in a bloody quarrel with the Tsaubwa of Sgah. A 
Burman was sent to take the reins of government, and large numbers of the people 
fled north into Legya. The town of Merng Sit is said to be almost deserted. 


Tracts Distributed — Seed by the Wayside. 16.— About seven o’clock this morn- 
ing we reached a place where the people had begun to congregate under some noble 
banyan-trees to hold a bazaar. They were respectful, but only a part of them would 
receive books. Leaving them, we kept distributing books along the road to such as 
would promise to read them. As these people were from many different villages, the 
books will reach where we have not time to go. 

We breakfasted towards noon under a banyan-tree by the roadside, near a_ little 
Yang Set village. Here with difficulty we succeeded in purchasing water enough to 
cook our rice with. A few travellers halted and talked with us. Late in the af- 
ternoon we reached the guard station of Hegh Pak, about ten miles north of Monai 
city. The head man greeted me warmly, as one of the teachers who came last year. 
There being no accommodations for us at the station, two soldiers voluntarily piloted 
us to a zayat about a mile beyond, and called a guard from a village near by. Until 
late in the night the conversation was about the religion of the Eternal God. Thus 
God leads us. Ifsome of the seed falls into “ good ground,” our joy will be full. 


Arrival in Monai. 17.—We reached Monai city by noon, having been detained 
upon the road on account of one of the ponies running away. The city presented the 
same appearance as last year. The palace, the pagodas, the kyoungs, were all the 
same. We took up quarters in a large zayat by the “ Tsow Pet Prah” or “ Twenty- 
eight god’s ” pagoda, a lofty pagoda, having-seven large images of Gaudama on each 
of its four sides. The usual official business of presenting the royal order, etc., having 
been finished, we were glad of a little rest before the news of our arrival should spread. 
A few only visited us before evening closed in. 

18.— From early morning until sunset, the zayat has been constantly crowded. 
The assistants have been talking all the day, hardly stopping to eat food. Shans and 
Burmans, men, women, and children, have thronged around us, and among them there 
have been many interested listeners. The demand for books has been very great, and 
we have given only to such as could read, and promised to read. Many sat down and 
read an entire book befure they left the zayat. 


4 
. 
4 
3 \ 
4 
af 4 


1870.] Trip from Toungoo to Monai. 35 


The Discomfited Scribe. One example is rather amusing. Yesterday I sent the 
Woondouk, who is always a Burman, a New Testament and a copy of Genesis and 
Exodus. A scribe in his court, thus learning that 1 had books of the new religion, 
came to get some. Though a shrewd, talented man, he had evidently received 
his religion, without a doubt, as it descended to him from his ancestors. At first he 
was rather boisterous and disposed to cavil. I gave him a copy of the “ Giad Tid- 
ings,” when one of his friends requested him to read it aloud. He began with a fine 
sonorous voice; but as one statement after another was read, his tones of surprise be- 
came very amusing. Having finished the tract, he politely and frankly said, “ There 
is cause for inquiry.” 

Our stock of books has been nearly exhausted, as we must reserve some for other 
places yet to be visited. The day has been an excéedingly interesting one. Besides 
people from the city and villages around, persons from Theinnee and Keng Toong 
have visited us, requesting books to carry back with them. 


Visit to the Woondouk. 19.— This morning I paid a visit to the Woondouk, who 
is the Burman military commander of all the placesin the Shan States east and west 
of the Salwen. He commands all the Tsaubwas and other rulers in Shan land. The 
present Woondouk is not the same one who ruled here last year, the Lemaing Woon- 
douk having been sent north to Theinnee on account of the civil war there. I found 
the Woondouk sitting in a chair near a well, superintending some work. Ilis cour- 
tiers were crouching about him, and the golden umbrella was spread over him. As 1 
approached he addressed me very pleasantly, and leaving his chair squatted upon 
the ground beside me. After some general talk, he took one of the books in my band 
and ordered a scribe to read it. It happened to be the “ Investigator,” and furnished 
him much amusement. He made many inquiries about our religion, and listened at- 
tentively. I could have wished no more pleasant interview. Towards evening I vis- 
ited the eldest son of the ‘Tsaubwa whom I saw last year. The king has la‘ely made 
him Tsaubwa of Keng Tong. 

All the forenoon the zayat was crowded, until suddenly the platform in front gave 
way, and fifty people or more were precipitated to the ground ten feet below. It was 
providential that no one was seriously injured. This accident rendered entrance into 
the zayat very difficult, so that I took another near by for preaching purposes. The 
visitors, however were as numerous as ever, and the demand for books as great as 
yesterday. As it was bazaar day, many from the country were in the city and 
came. 


A Native Preaching before the Government. During the forenoon a messenger came, 
requesting me to bring the royal order to the court, in order to have the Woondouk’s 
supplementary order made out. As my presence was unnecessary for this business, 
I sent Sang Myat. ‘The Woondouk, Nakau, and all the Burmese officials were pres- 
ent. For more than an hour they listened to his preaching. My heart was filled 
with joy, that this young man dared to preach the Gospel so plainly before the gran- 
dees of the realm. In my presence and out of it, asl know by the testimony of 
others, he has declared firmly the truth of our holy religion. 

I was much amused at a Burman who came to me and asked if I was not afraid to 
preach this new religion; for I must know that the king put a man to death a few 
months ago for doubting the divinity of Gaudama. 

20.— We left the city by the same road by which we came. Passing the guard 
station where I gave books, we reached the village of Mak-kin-nu, or apple village. 
Near by is a large bamboo house, erected for the Tsaubwa’s son to sleep in on his re- 
cent return from Mandelay to Monai. We occupied this, though it was early in the 
afternoon, and found abundant opportunity to give Shan tracts to persons from the 
three villages in sight. One man had heard of Christ through persons who had visit- 


| 
} 
) 
| 
. 
d 
d 
d 


86 Trip from Toungoo to Monai. (February, 


ed lower Burmah. He was anxious to evade conversation, for he saw the many weak 
points of his religion. Near by was a caravan returning from Monai to Theban, 
among whom tracts were circulated. 

21,— Early this morning we removed to a place near by, where we could have ac- 
cess to some other villages and preach to them. It is called Nong-sa-weet, from a lit. 
tle pond westward of the kyoung. There was a pwe near by, at which many from the 
villages in the vicinity were ansembled. Here books were given and the preaching 
to. 


Providential Escape — Guardian Nat Killed. Towards night I had a narrow es- 
cape from a poisonous snake. As I was walking near the shore of the pond, paying 
no heed to my steps, I discovered a brown viper, just as I was in the act of stepping on 
him. It is a sluggish reptile, but its bite is as poisonous as that of any serpent in the 
country. After my involuntary retreat, I attacked him. Some people called from a 
distance, “ Don’t beat him. He is the guardian nat of the pond. He will be angry, 
and the water will dry up.” However, the work was effectually accomplished, and 
the nat returned to nat country, for aught I know. 

22. — We reached Ho Yang towards noon, the village where I promised to remain 
over night and preach, on my return from Monai. The men were all gone to ba- 
zaar,two miles distant; but the women came and listened. One assistant carried 
books to bazaar and preached. In the evening all the men came and were very at- 
tentive. The people of this village are Saudees. While they believe that Gaudama 
became God, they do not worship him; for he has taken Nigban and does not exist 
now. Neither do they worship poongyees and pagodas. They reverence the Buddb. 
ist books, and look for the coming of a god who shall live on the earth seven days 
and accomplish great good. They have a great teacher in the edge of the Chinese 
territory, whom they visit and receive instruction. The journey from Merng Sit oc 
cupies about a month. 

The people feel insecure here, because there is no stable government in this Tsaub- 
waship at present. Last evening a man was murdered about three miles away. He 
was returning from bazaar. It was after dark, and six or sven robbers made quick 
work with bim. Many would have followed me to lower burmah, hadI given per- 
mission. 


Desire for Books — Anxious Inquirer. 23.— Leaving this village, I took a south- 
westerly road, in order to visit Inlayua, Sgah and Mobyaé, a road which br. Rose and 
I were not permitted to travel last year on account of the state of war existing there. 
We were the whole forenoon crossing a high and difficult range of mountains. We 
met large companies of Shans, Yang Sets, and Pantoongs, going to a pwe. The Pan- 
toong women wear the Karen sack, but the red and white are so blended as to make a 
pretty plaid. On the road, several asked us for books, having heard of the teacher's 
visit. We halted and ate by a well. At this point, we found a guard station, it be- 
ing the boundary between Merng Sit and Merng Pon. It is called Nam Sing. Here 
a crowd of travellers collected. We ‘sow beside all waters,” but God knows what 
will prosper. 

In the afternoon we crossed the Nam Pon river. The road was over a broken 
range of mountains, inhabited by Toungthoos. The views were picturesque and beau- 
tiful. At the Shan village of Nah Loong we found a new zayat, which we occupied. 
West of us Loi Seng loomed up, telling us of the tedious journey before us on the mor- 
row. South of us, far in the distance, was the lofty peak of Loi Mor, rising far above its 
companions. After the villagers dispersed, an aged woman remained behind. As I 
overheard her conversation with Mrs. Cushing, my heart was deeply moved. She 
spoke of her fear of death. She knew no way of salvation, and wanted to know 
about the new religion, and how she should pray to this God who can save. 


ol 
Ww 
Ww 
w 
01 
le 
tl! 
fu 
4 cl 
80 
T 
al 
st 
is 
m 
si 
bi 
4 hi 
~ th 
w 
in 
th 
8¢ 
la 
p! 
fo 
W 
la 
In 
‘ (l 
T 
th 
th 
th 
th 
by 
ce 
Ti 
ser 
len 
lof 
th 


1870.] Trip from Toungoo to Monai. 37 


Up and down the Mountains. 24.— With the first dawn of morning light we were 
on the road; for the people warned us of the difficulties before us. All the forenoon 
we were going up, up, up the mountain. No descent relieved us. Both body and 
mind were wearied. It was a merciful providence that much of the way was shady, 
which is not generally the case in the Shan country. No villages were to be seen and 
water could not be found. Near the summit our road lay along a ridge. The abyss 
on either side was fearful. In all my mountain travel, I have never seen deeper val- 
leys and ravines. It was past midday when we found water gushing out of the side of 
the mountain. After cooking and eating, we pursued our journey. Down, down we 
went, and did not reach the plain until twilight. The scenery was weird and beauti- 
ful. Many of the mountain spurs, as they approached the plain broke into jagged 
cliffs and beetling precipices, while here and there an immense, inaccessible pillar of 
solid rock rose far above its associates. 

25.— We are nowin the Tsaubwaship of Nong Wan. At present there is no 
Tsaubwa. The son of the late Tsaubwa is in the Puseyite school at Rangoon, and is 
averse to the wish of the people that he should return and become Tsaubwa. This 
state is not in a prosperous condition. The amount of paddy land under cultivation 
is less than ever before. The villages, though quite numerous, are smaller than for- 
merly. It is a fine country, and might be made to blossom as the rose. We met 
crowds returning from a great pwe miles away. The curiosity and surprise at the 
sight of a white lady were very amusing. We did not enter the village of Nong Wan, 
but saw it ata distance. It is very small, and derives its name from the fact that the 
houses are built about a small lake or pond. 


Toungthoo Villages. We ate at Nam Kote, a village by the roadside. Many from 
the crowd of passengers stopped to see us, while a smaller number paid attention to 
what was said. Crossing the remainder of the plain, and going over a few gentle hills, 
we reached the Toungthoo village of Kyoung To. Toungthoo villages dotted the hills 
in every direction. Some spoke a little Shan, but the great majority knew Toung- 
thoo only. We could not therefore talk much here. 

26.— Aguin we entered the mountains. After a series of gentle ascents and de- 
scents, we came in sight of the plain of Inlayua, with its beautiful lake and lovely vil- 
lages. ‘The descent was long and very steep, as the mountains rise abruptly from the 
plain. This plain has a much lower level than the one we left yesterday. The road 
followed the side of a mountain torrent, now dry, but evidently powerful in the rains. 
We arrived at the village of Randabar, situated on the southeastern corner of the 
lake. Across the water was Nam Pan, one of the four villages which give the name of 
Inlayua (four villages of the lake) to this region. The Shans call it Merng Nong 
(lake country). 

Nam Pan is beautifully situated. It is built upon several islands, all of them small. 
Two islands are devoted exclusively to kyoungs and pagodas. Some of these are 
very old, and seem to rise out of the water as if taey were the work of fairies. As 
there was no mode of access except by boats, we were soon swiftly gliding towards one of 
the islands. The water was perfectly clear and not very deep. For a long distance, 
the bottom was covered with a pretty water weed. Where there was any current, 
the bottom was hard and pebbly. The island was covered with houses, and here, as 
by the other islands, many houses are built entirely over the water, with no way of ac- 
cess except by boats. Our stay was brief, as the people were inclined to be boisterous. 
Towards sunset we took a sail northward. In that direction the water and the horizon 
seemed totouch. The lake is long and rather narrow. At this season of the year the 
length is about twelve miles. 

I know of no more lovely valley in the Shan. country than this. Surrounded by 
lofty mountains, with its beautiful lake, its island villages, it rouses the admiration of 
the beholder. Inlayua is not a Tsaubwaship. It is now governed by a deputy of the 


H 
it 

| 


38 Trip from Toungoo to Monai. (February, 


Tsaubwa of Nyoungyua, and is a dependency of that Tsaubwaship. The people are 
heavily taxed, being obliged to pay several rupees a month for every house. 

The language here is very curious. Some speak Shan, some Burmese, but the ma- 
jority speak a kind of Burmese called Highyah, in which Shan and Burman sounds are 
strangely intermingled. At Randabar, many villagers and travellers listened to the 
preaching. 

27.— As there were no boats sufficiently large to carry a pony, we resumed our 
land journey. We wished to avail ourselves of the river, but thought it unadvisable to 
separate our party. At Chokteng we found large numbers of people holding a ba- 
zaar. We did nottarry long, but went on to Nyoungwoon. Here villagers and trav- 
ellers gathered about us for conversation. In the afternoon we passed through the 
pretty Tsaubwaship of Koon Hoo. The town of that name has disappeared, having 
been destroyed some time ago in a war with the Tsaubwa of Sgah. 

At Mokpee we passed a large collection of pagodas. The people had begun to col- 
lect, asa great pwe will begin to-morrow. We reached Hanglee, a village over the 
boundary in the Tsaubwaship of Sgah or Samkah, as the Shans call it. It is prettily 
situated on the bank of the Mobyaé river. A barricade surrounds it. Our zayat was 
on the river bank. This river flows out of Inlayua lake, south, through Samkah 
Mobyaé, until it is lost in an opening in the plain. It is quite deep and moderately 
broad. 

28. — The people of Hanglee have been very kind to us. As we were on the river 
bank, many boat-loads of people visited us. There was an unusual number of passen- 
gers, on account of the pwe above. Hence we had many listeners from other places 
than the village. 


Burman Fort and Fortified City. March 1.— Our morning march brought us to 
Samkah city. The Tsaubwa is absent at Mandelay, but a relative is in temporary 
authority. He received a Testament and some tracts. The city is pleasantly situated. 
A palisade runs around it, pierced by four gates. The houses are scattered, and the 
city is evidently a shadow of its former self. On the southern side is a Burman fort, 
of rude construction. Only a few soldiers remain in it. The people visited us in 
large numbers, mostly actuated by curiosity to see a whitelady. ‘The zayats about 
us were filled with Burman soldiers, returning to Ava from the south. Since the re- 
bellious Mingoon prince has been disposed of, the king is gradually withdrawing his 
forces. A short afternoon march over a lightly wooded country brought us toa 
wretched Toungthoo village, where we stopped for the night. 

March 2. — We are now in the region desolated by the recent war. West of us 
run the mountains which compose the Tsaubwaship of Loi Loong, or Tissennytoung 
as the Burmese call it. This is a long strip of mountainous country. At the eastern 
base of one of the mountains is a small lake. East of us, beyond the mountains, lies 
Mokme. Our road lay through the eastern part of the petty Tsaubwaship of Nam 
Toke. The city was embowered in trees. Continuing our journey over the long bar- 
ren plain, always keeping near the eastern bank of the Mobyaé river, we reached the 
fortified city of Sagwi. The few inhabited villages which we saw were strongly stock- 
aded. Deserted villages, unworked paddy fields, abandoned entrenchments, spoke of 
the devastations of grim war. 

The city of Sagwi is surrounded by a deep moat and embankment of earth. Three 
rows of posts are firmly placed in the ground, the outer row being the highest. Be- 
tween these rows earth has been filled in, so that there are two terraces running 
around the inside of the embankment, for the convenience of soldiers. There are 
four gates strongly guarded by sentry posts. The city has been almost deserted by 
the Shans. ‘The few who remained showed the degrading effects of the war. They 
were coarse and rude beyond any people whom we have met. Some of the Burmese 
soldiery had heard of the truth before, and immediately showed their hostility to the 


4 
a 


1370.] Mission to Shans: — Letter from Mrs. Cushing. 39 


name of Christ. It is hard to hear the name of Jesus handled with levity by a 
thoughtless rabble. 

After a few hours we left this ungracious place. Three miles brought us to Pyah- 
gone, a Burman fort, the present head-quarters of the general. The Burman forts 
are admirably situated for commanding this valley. Sagwi in the centre, Pyahgone on 
the west, and another fort on the east which I did not visit, are so situated that no 
hostile force of any size can pass without notice. The first two mentioned are on the 
Mobyaé river, which here makes'a bend to the westward. Small fortifications inter- 
vened, which are now abandoned. Near the Burman fort Pyahgone, is a substantial 
bridge. On the opposite side of the river are the remains of a large village and Tsaub- 
wa’s residence. During the war, the people abandoned the place and founded Kon- 
gee, the present residence of the Mobyaé Tsaubwa. I visited the fort with my Royal 
Order, to present it to the Myailawoon. It encloses a large space, and is devoted ex- 
clusively to soldiery. The wall is not as strong as that of Sagwi. Outside of the 
wall@were long rows of sharpened bamboo sticks, a few inches long and firmly planted 
in the ground. One little brass piece was all the artillery to be seen. The place was 
well adapted to resist a hostile native force. The general received me with courtesy 
though he felt his importance wonderfully. The interview was very brief, as I wished. 
to hasten on. 

Though late in the afternoon, I determined to reach Kongee, six miles away, for 
there were only soldiers here, and they were rude. Sending a messenger ahead to 
announce my coming to the Tsaubwa and request him to send men to meet me, as I 
could not arrive until after dark, and the gates would be closed, [started on. The 
road lay over rocky hills, sparsely wooded. As the darkness closed in, messengers met 
us with a hearty welcome, and guided us to the city. We were disappointed to find 
that the Tsaubwa was on a tour to the south, collecting taxes. His wife, however, 
caused a house to be placed at our disposal, and all needful things to be done. 

We remained at Kongee one day, receiving constant kindness. On the morning of 
March 4th, we left for Toungoo, pursuing the same route over the mountains as in 
December last, and arrived in Toungoo Thursday evening, March 12th. During the 
whole journey we have been the constant recipients of God’s grace. By Ilis blessing 
no evil has befallen us. Mrs. Cushing’s health has improved. When we have 
preached, we have never wanted attentive listeners. The only thing to be regretted 
is that our time was too short to allow us to remain in some places as we wished to do. 
The approach of the hot season and our removal to Rangoon necessitated our return 
to Toungoo at this time. If good has been,done, our hearts will rejoice. 


LETTERS FROM THE MISSIONS.’ 


BURMAH. returned. Then we took others, and after 
a while girls came. Altogether twenty- 


{Mission to Shans. three have been connected with the 


LETTER FROM Mrs. CUSHING. 


School and its Results. Rangoon, Oct. 6, 
1869. — Early in the rains we took six boys 
from Santabin, a village three miles out 
from Rangoon. This immediately stirred 
up the wrath of the parents there ; they 
beat some of the boys, threatened the 
mothers, etc., until most of the children 


school, of whom nine were here at the 
close. We have preferred having a few 
for a long time rather than a large num- 
ber for a short time, as the influence is 
more lasting. 

Of these nine, two, we have reason to 
hope, have become subjects of the Great 
Master, and one or two others are in a 
hopeful way. Two of the boys who went 


J 
- 
) 
. 
» 


40 Mission to Karens : — Letter from Mr. Bunker. (February, 


home to-day have prayed to our Father 
for weeks past, and have gone away with 
a purpose never to worship idols again. 
The oldest boy, perhaps nineteen or twenty 
years old, will go with us to the Shan 
country to carry books. He, I trust, will 
be a permanent member of the mission. 

The boys have learned to read well, 
write, and have made considerable prog- 
ress in mental arithmetic and geography, 
besides committing to memory much Scrip- 
ture truth. The girls have learned to 
read and committed the catechism. Now 
we are preparing to go to the mountains, 
and must leave all that has been done 
here, trusting that the seed sown may 
spring up and bear much fruit. 

Pray very much for us this drv season, 
that we may be preserved, as we wend 
our way over mountains and valleys, 
where our God has not been named, that 
in the midst of wild beasts and wilder 
men, we may be kept unharmed, and that 
God may be glorified, 


to Barens. 
LEerrer Mr. BuNKER. 


School at Toungoo. Toungoo, Sept. 18, 
1869.— Last week, after a session of six- 
teen weeks, we closed our school in town. 
The schoo) has numbered 120 odd, and 
averaged nearly 100 in daily attendance, 
a great advance on last year, so far as 
numbers are concerned.. The residents 
of the station who examined the school 
were pleased to pronounce it a success. 


. Thus another blow has been struck for the 


Kingdom of Christ and against heathen- 
ism. We believe that through Christ it 
has been effectual in weakening the ene- 
my. He has roused himself from time to 
time during the term to hinder the work 
in various ways ; but Jesus has given us 
the victory in every case. Strict disci- 
pline has been maintained and the boys 
held to their work to the last. 

Included among the pupils was a class 
of girls. A strong effort was made thus 
to start a girls’ school, and, thanks to the 
contributions of the Watertown F. F. M. 
Society, we have been able to make a 


beginning; our class of girls numbering 
twenty odd during most of the term. 


Pupils Baptized. On the last Sabbath 
of the term five of the pupils after bap- 
tism were received into the church in 
town. This was a season of peculiar joy 
and hope ; one which we hope will be ever 
remembered as the beginning of a good 
work among the Red Karens. 


Experience and Baptism of a Red Ka- 
ren. I think I have spoken in a previous 
letter of the young man from the Red Ka- 
ren people, who came over from Kangnee 
after our return from that country in 
March last. Last Sabbath, he was bap- 
tized by a native pastor. His experience, 
related before the church on a previous 
evening, contained many interesting facts 
which show that he has apparently long 
been a chosen vessel of the Spirit to bear 
the gospel to his people. Long before he 
had heard of the gospel of Jesus, he often 
felt great fear on account of his wicked- 
ness, and resolved again and again to 
cast off what seemed to him wrong. This 
fact seems to show in a marked manner 
that the Holy Spirit strives with those 
who never heard of Jesus, and that the 
heathen have the law written on their 
hearts. He felt a growing distaste for the 
superstitions of his rave, yet knew not 
how to break away from them. 

When a native preacher was sent to 
his village several years ago by Dr. Ma- 
son, he at once put himself under his tui- 
tion, much against the will of his relations. 
He also cast off the heathen practices of 
his fathers and Logan the observance of 
the Sabbath. After the withdrawal of 
these teachers he gradually, through the 
reviling of his own people and his want 
of knowledge, relapsed into a neglect of 
the Sabbath, and again resumed that wor- 
ship, although, as be said, he had no 
longer any faith in it. When I found 
him last February, he was almost as fallen 
as any of his countrymen. He could read 
a little in the Sgau Bible, but very im- 
perfectly. He could speak also a few 
words in the Sgau dialect. All his for- 
mer teaching had been in the Bghai di- 
alect. After reaching Toungoo, he ap- 


4 | 
= 


1870.] 


plied himself with unremitting zeal to his 
books, beginning with the spelling book. 
He soon learned to read the Sgau Bible 
fluently, and devoted much of his time to 
its study. Atone time when conversing 
with him he said, “Teacher, when I 
read the Bible I see my sins and fear 
greatly. I am a great sinner indeed.” 

His deportment was peculiarly serious 
from the beginning. He did not profess 
to be a disciple, but wanted to know more 
of the way that he might become a true 
one. Old Kan Kai, in speaking of him 
at one time, says, “ Nga-pah has very 
many thoughts. He is thinking all the 
time.” 

In my conversations with him from 
time to time, I discovered that the only 
thing that was keeping him from a full 
profession of Christ was the fear that he 
should fall again when in the midst of the 
reviling of his people, and in an unguard- 
ed moment bring to shame his Saviour. 
We thought we descried here the genuine 
work of the Spirit, and it was a delight to 
explain to him the preserving grace of 
Jesus, At last he threw himself upon 
Jesus and asked baptism. 

The eve before his baptism in the 
morning, he came to me with tears in his 
eyes, and said, “ Teacher I have asked 
baptism. I want you all to pray for me 
that I do not bring Jesus to shame, that 
He will keep me in all temptations.” 

I think the readers of the Magazine too 
would have shed tears of joy with his tears 
of anxiety, if they had watched his prog- 
ress with the longing that we felt for 
him that he might be given to us as the 
first fruits of Karenee. 

He came up out of the waters happy, 
and we believe he will be the means of 
leading many to Jesus. While here many 
of his countrymen have visited the mis- 
sion, and Nga-pah has been unremitting 
in his efforts to enlighten their dark minds, 
reading the Bible, exhorting, and praying 
with them. Most laugh at him; and one 
time, after talking with a large band for 
some time without any apparent effect, he 
came to me and said, “ O how dark are 
my people! They know nothing but 
darkness.” 


Mission to Karens :— Letter from Mr. Carpenter. 


41 


Just as he was to be baptized — the day 
before — he received a letter from his wife 
in Karenee, where our native pastors 
were stationed last March. This letter 
he brought to me. His wife writes to 
him, “ Study hard and do not fear for me. 
If you can, come home in the dry season 
and help me get my rice. But do not 
come till you have learned all. I too am 
resolved to leave off evil and do right. 
I will drink no more arrack, and I will 
keep the Sabbath.” 


A Field to be Prayed for. At the 
present time Nga-pah has a Red Karen 
young man under his care, and is trying 
to teach him toread. This is also a prom- 
ising case. He says he will follow Nga- 
pah whithersoever he goes; but we can- 
not count on his sincerity, as he has been 
with us only a month. Has the Lord’s 
time come for liberating His chosen ones 
among the Red Karens? How I should 
like to devote my whole time to that peo- 
ple! Pray for us. God is able ; Jesus is 
able, and we believe He will open all the 
way before us. 


LETTER FROM Mr. CARPENTER. 


A Profitable Sabbath. Bassein, Aug. 
1, 1869. — We have had a pleasant and I 
trust profitable Sabbath, to-day. In the 
forenoon Poh Quay, one of the most prom 
inent Bassein Karen pastors, gave the 
school an excellent sermon from Matt. 
7: 24-27, Our Karen brethren often 
give us good sermons; but Poh Quay has 
a great heart, and this came right from 
his heart. It was well brought out and 
adapted to his audience, and being warm 
with love, it did us all good, Ithink. Our 
Sabbath-school at noon is conducted by 
Sah-nay. There are eight classes. The 
teachers all meet at our house Friday 
evenings, for tea, and I go over the les- 
son for the next Sabbath with them. 
This afternoon at 50’ clock, I conducted 
the monthly concert. The intelligence 
that new missionaries are coming to Bur- 
mah gave great satisfaction. 


si 
— | 


Mission to Assam : — Letter from Mr. Comfort. 


PAission to Assam. 
LerrerR FROM Mr. CoMFORT. 


The Work Onward. Gowahati, Oct. 
6, 1869.— I have much reason to be dis- 
satisfied with myself; but I have more 
reason to rejoice in tkat goodness and 
mercy of my Heavenly Father which 
have been vouchsafed to me and mine 
during the year now gone. I seem to have 
done nothing ; but, has the work of God 
for that reason not been going forward ? 
No, indeed! From other points come grat- 
ifying tidings that the hand of the Lord is 
not “ shortened that it cannot save.” His 
eye has pitied and His arm has brought sal- 
vation, —a salvation from darkness to a 
marvellous light, from the bondage of sin 
to the liberty of the sons of God, from the 
worship of that which pollutes and de- 
grades to the elevating and purifying 
worship of the true and living God. No! 


we may not think that we are essential to. 


the furtherance of the cause of Christ in 
the world, except as God’s plan makes 
us so. And therein is the honor He is 
pleased to bestow upon us in making us 
instruments for the good of others and the 
advancement of His own blessed cause 
upon earth. 


Tribute to Mr. Scott. And that God 
can and does dispense with those who 
have most eminent qualifications for that 
work, or who by their labors seem almost to 
have made themselves essential to its suc- 
cess in the future, we have been most 
sorrowfully reminded during the past year. 
One who has filled so conspicuous a place 
in the present history of our Assam Mis- 
sion as br. Scott, to be so suddenly removed 
from us, from his loved work, and from 
that gratifying and enlarged success which 
he promised to achieve, was to us a 
sad and mysterious providence. We are 
thrown back upon God ; upon our faith in 
Him, that we may believe, for we cannot 
see, — that our dear brother’s death is as 
good for the cause in which he was en- 
gaged as his life and labors would have 
been; back upon Him in the consoling 
thought that He is rich in resources, and 
can furnish our needy mission with other 
and useful men. Yes, our Leader does 


[February, 


live, though those who follow Him fall in 
the earthly strife. He is the Lord of this 
harvest and He will gather here those 
who are to be bound into “ the bundle of 
life with the Lord.” Let us hope and 
pray that He will in mercy give us from 
the resources at His command another 
laborer, as manly of purpose, as ~ noble 
in spirit, as attractive in character, as con- 
secrated to his work, as successful in la- 
bor, and as zealous for the cause of God as 
was our departed brother. 

I am tempted to give here the closing 
sentence of a letter sent from Nowgong, 
to be printed in the “ Orunodoi.” — Its 
author was a native and not a Christian. 
After giving an account of br. Scott's 
sickness and death, he says, “ A man 
like him, intelligent, pious, truthful, hum- 
ble, free from anger, contented, seeking 
the good of others, and diligent, is very 
rare.” 

But we are not to be discouraged by 
his death. We are rather to be inspired 
by the example of his life. And I also 
think that I am to be complacent over the 
evidence of progress elsewhere, though 
less may seem to be accomplished through 
our own instrumentality. ‘There is place 
for hope. Fruit has not been seen. But 
it may be looked for. I may be allowed 
to give Paul’s expression in Romans an 
unusual application then ; I will say that 
“if we hope for that we see not, then 
do we with patience wait for it.” 


Favorable Openings for the Gospel. I 
gave an account, shortly after my return, 
of a brief trip I made down the rivera few 
miles, where a large market is held. I 
was pleased with the little foretaste I 
then obtained, of a kind of missionary 
work I hope to engage in largely and fre- 
quently. There are not a few places 
with general characteristics like Pulos- 
bari, that may be quite easily reached 
from Gowahati. It will be with little cost 
of time, and numbers of people may be 
found to whom to proclaim the message of 
life. Isent also extracts from a journal 
kept by Kandura during the month he 
spent among the villages of Hill-people to 
the south and east of this place. That brief 
tour showed that there are many people 


42 
3 
4 
3 


1870.] 


ready to listen with attention to the story 
of the cross. O, how we could wish that 
to hear was also to receive. But if in 
obedience to the great command we go 
among them and preach the gospel, will 
not those who are ordained unto eternal 
life believe ? 


Visit to the Garos. I sent out Kandura 
onasecondtour. He was absent for a few 
weeks. He laid his course in a southwest- 
erly direction, continuing on through the 
villages to which he came. Ina few days 
he arrived where some of our Garo Chris- 
tians are to be found. He visited all the 
places where they are located, preaching 
to the brethren, and spent at least one 
Sabbath at Rajasimla. The visit seemed 
to have been alike agreeable and profita- 
ble to himself and the brethren. He re- 
turned by the way of Gowalpara, coming 
from that point to Gowahati by steamer. 
That trip demonstrated the fact that it 
is not difficult to reach some portions of 
the interesting Garo field from that point. 
Br. Stoddard and I can meet and clasp 
hands for each other’s encouragement and 
satisfaction, on the field that lies between 
our respective locations. I am in hopes 
we may do so the coming cold season. 
During the few weeks’ visit which we 
made to Gowalpara in the rains, it was 
not convenient to go out to the Garos. 
We however had the pleasure of seeing 
several of them at br. Stoddard’s. 


LETTER FROM Mrs. CLARK. 


Sibsagor, Sept. 23, 1869. — Before 
coming to India, I thought my husband's 
position as superintendent of the press, 
compelling him to remain mostly at the 
station, more desirable, as | had misgiv- 
ings about the jungles and the hills. Now, 
gladly would my feet press the latter, and 
my tongue tell those who are ready to 
hear, the wondrous story of the Cross. 


Welcome to a Native Preacher. Our 
preacher, Modhu, on his return from his 
last preaching tour to a Burman Shan 
village, reports as follows: On the way 


wherever he went into any village, he 


Mission to Assam: — Letter from Mrs. Scott. 


48 


was recognized, the people crying out,“ O, 
the religious pundit has come! Where 
is the old man who is usually with you ? 
(meaning Kolebor, preacher.) They said, 
“We all know you, have heard your 
words a great many times at the Sibsagor 
Court-house, and in your visits to us in 
previous years. Your teaching is good ; 
nobody can deny it. All believe it is to 
prevail in due time.” Some said, “ We 
believe it and would be glad to receive 
it, but the older classes are too strong for 
us. We do not believe in idols, but.the 
older people compel us to do what we do 
not believe in, or care for.” The minds 
of the people are unsettled, they do not 
respect and obey the gooroos (religious 
teachers) as formerly. 


Teacher Desired. On arriving at the 
Burman village, all seemed glad to see 
him, and listened attentively, but especially 
enjoyed the singing of hymns and reading 
of the New Testament. Some thought 
the Christians’ teaching a good deal like 
that of Gaudama in their own religious 
books, but we assured them it was not the 
case. They wanted Christians to come 
and teach a school in their village, saying 
that they could then understand Christian- 
ity better ; that it was hard to comprehend 
it in so short a time. They did not make © 
any pledges to accept it, but wanted a 
teacher, ‘to teach a school and the doc- 
trine. They have no casté like the Hin- 
dus ; they have however a sort of priest of 
their own, but he too listened attentively, 
and received him (Modhu) cordially. He 
staid with them several days. This vil- 
lage is about fifty miles from Sibsagor. 


LEeTreR FROM Mrs. Scort. 


Baptism of a Mikir. Nowgong, Sept. 
30, 1869. The coming of our dear 
friends, Mr. and Mrs. Ward, has cheered 
the little band at Nowgong not alittle, and 
Mr. Ward’s sermons have been listened to 
with the deepest interest. Two weeks 
ago he buried in baptism one of our nor- 
mal school pupils, the young man, Mon. 
He is a Mikir of high position and influ- 
ence and one of the most thorough of the 


i 
| 
| 
| 


44 


“ Hill-tribe school” pupils. He has ina 
very short time learned to read in Assam- 
ese, Bengali and English. He has been 
employed two months during the past year 
as colporteur on the hills, and has done 
good service. He starts again on his 
much loved errand of mercy to his peo- 
ple in a few weeks. 

Mon is supported by the Baptist Sab- 
bath-school in Griggsville, Ill. After he 
came from the baptism, he said to me, 
“O, how I wish my dear teacher Scott 
could have seen me take this public stand 
for Jesus.” When I told him that in my 
own mind I did not doubt but his dear 
teacher saw it and ‘rejoiced, he seemed al- 
most overcome with joy at the thought. 
It is necessary however, with this people 
to be extremely cautious how we speak of 
the unseen world and the ministry of an- 
gels, lest we lend force to their natural 
superstitious tendencies. The work gen- 


erally is moving on encouragingly. 


Southern China Mission. 


LETTER FROM Mr. ASHMORE. 


Happy Sabbath — Welcome Visitor. 
Swatow, Aug. 14, 1869. — Our communion 
season just over has been a time of refresh- 
ing to us all. Amid the universal dreari- 
ness of this valley full of dry bones, we see 
now and then indications that we do not 
altogether in vain say, “ O ye dry bones, 
hear the word of the Lord.” We had ten 
applicants for baptism, but only three of 
the number were received; the others 
were deferred for various reasons, but we 
hope that next communion some of them 
will surely be admitted. Three were 
baptized here, and also four at Tang 
Leng the Sunday after our own commun- 
ion. 

We have just had an unexpected, but 
a most welcome visit from br. Knowlton. 
He had but a few days to spend, but we 
improved the time much to my pleasure 
and profit,“at least, in comparing notes and 
experiences of the mission work. We 
were very glad we had so much that led us 
to common convictions and a common judg- 
ment as to the best method of carrying 


Southern China Mission : — Letter from Mr. Ashmore. 


[February, 


on the work, Our church members, such 
of them as were able to be here to make 
his acquaintance, rejoiced to hear partic- 
ulars of the work in and around Ningpo. 


Literary Graduate, Convinced but Timid. 
An old acquaintance, whose name has 
been reported in times gone by, called 
upon me yesterday. He is the literary 
graduate living at Te Ine, who for full 
three years now has shown some interest 
in the truth. He has always called upon 
me when I have been at the chapel in Te 
Ine; but so many persons have been 
about then that no opportunity for special 
conversation has presented itself equal to 
that of which I am now speaking. 

Referring to his well known declaration 
of belief in the truth, I asked him where 
he stood, and why he did not boldly avow 
the faith he privately acknowledged? To 
this and to a variety of similar questions, 
he made reply substantially as follows : 

“Of course I continue to believe the 
truth, nor do I ever have anything to do 
with idolatry. Indeed before I saw your 
Christian books, I had lost faith in the idols, 
either to do harm or good ; and when I 
read this doctrine, I said at once it was 
truth, and was just what was needed to 
make men better. Why should I change 
an opinion which is a good one for that 
which is false? Having left the false, I 
do not go back to it. But for me to avow 
myself publicly a Christian is a matter of 
greater difficulty than you think of. I am 
not my own master. If I should dismiss 
my school every seventh day as you re- 
quire, I should break my plate and bowl 
[that is, his livelihood]. I am not the only 
one in this condition. The owner of the 
house you have rented thinks as I do, but 
he is even more fearful ; for when he wants 
to go to the chapel, he asks me to go along, 
so as to help him keep his face [that is, 
not lose reputation ].” 

Certainly this is a humiliating confes- 
sion of weakness. This graduate has a 
clear, well defined knowledge of the truth, 
as I know ; but here he is afraid to con- 
fess, lest he should lose his living. There 
is not much ground to hope for such an 
one ; but the house owner alluded to 
seems to look at things far more seriously, 


a 
Oe 
= 
= 
. 
a 


1870.) 


and I hope yet to hear of his becoming an 
open believer. 

The graduate is quite an honest, out- 
spoken man, and he is vastly better than 
the bulk of his countrymen, in telling 
frankly what he truly feels and thinks. 
So I took occasion to ask him some other 
things, and said to him, “ Tell me fully 
and frankly just what the mass of people 
think of Christianity.” 


How the People view Christianity. He 
replied, “ There are many thinking people 
who say that this religion is true, and that 
it is a good religion. But others deny 
this, and say, all this is an impious attempt 
to deceive and mislead the common peo- 
ple; that the missionaries are destitute of 
filial piety, who thus teach their disciples 
to repudiate the worship of ancestors, and 
their coming among us will destroy the 
geomantic advantages possessed by our 
towns and villages. To this the first class 
respond by saying, “ Surely that cannot 
be a bad religion which teaches its con- 
verts to avoid gambling, opium smoking 
and debauchery. It is a pity they do not 
teach the worship of ancestors as well, 
and have respect to geomancy, for then 
it would be most excellent. Sometimes 
the people become quite excited, talking 
over these matters, but those who have a 
good word to say for Christianity are not 
persistent in the face of opposition, while 
the other side is always vehement and 
angry, so that in the end the denouncers 
have it their own way. And _ besides 
these, there are yet other persons who 
advocate violence without sense or reason. 
But although there is much talking noth- 
ing is done, and the preaching is not inter- 
fered with.” 

As the graduate was telling me all 
these things at much greater length than 
I rehearse them, I was forcibly reminded 
of the similarity of working between the 
Chinese mind and the Jewish. “ And 
there was much murmuring among the 
people concerning Him; for some said, 
He is a good man, others said, Nay, but he 
deceiveth the people.” This part of the 
conversation was to me most deeply inter- 
esting. To hear such news from the 
camp of the enemy, was like getting a 
glimpse of Gideon’s barley cake. 


Mission to Teloogoos : — Letter from Mr. Clough. 


45 


How Foreigners are Regarded. His 
opinion on another subject interested me. 
Some of our missionary friends think the 
present retrograde policy (called progress 
by Mr. Burlingame,) now being pursued 
by the Chinese, and which seeks the 
exclusion of foreigners from the interior, 
is. mainly on account of the merchants, 
and that missionaries would be tolerated 
everywhere. I asked him what he 
thought to be the truth ? He said, “ The 
people hate to have the merchant come, 
but I do not think they like you. They 
hate all foreigners as a class. In one re- 
spect the merchant has the advantage ot 
you. He goes to increase trade and 
scatter money. You go to preach against 
sin and against their idols, and you are 
not welcome even among people who be- 
lieve you sincere and honest. You are 
looked upon as a disturber of the old 
order of things.” There is both sense 
and Scripture in this. 


— 


INDIA.— MADRAS PRESIDENCY. 


PAission to the Teloogoos. 
LETTER FROM Mr. CLOUGH. 


Twenty-seven Baptized. Ongole, Aug. 
30, 1869. — Yesterday we again visited | 
our new baptistery and immersed twenty- 
seven of those who seemed to be worthy of 
the ordinance. Among the number were 
three Eurasians,— Mr. S., Inspector of Po- 
lice, Ongole ; his wife and mother-in-law. 
Three years ago they were living in open 
rebellion against God, high-handed sin- 
ners, and hardened by vice long continued. 
For them we have toiled and prayed three 
years, and now our hope has been real- 
ized. They have been brought out of the 
pit, and a filthy one too; washed and re- 
stored to their right mind, and made to 
sing a new song. You will rejoice with 
us. Jesus is not only blessing the Teloo- 
goos, but the English and East Indians 
also. 


Tour to Cumbum. Naidpetta, Sept. 6. 
— Since the date of the first part of this 
letter, I have started on a tour to Cum- 


| 


46 


bum and the towns and villages in that 
vicinity. I left home on the Ist inst. 
accompanied by two native preachers, 
tent, pony, and supplies for fifteen or 
twenty days. We took the government 
road leading northwest from Ongole, passed 
through Nootallapand, a town of 3,000 
inhabitants, where six of our native Chris- 
tians live, visited them for a short time 
and then went on to Shemacoortee, 
another large place, fourteen miles from 
Ongole, where there are several hopeful 
inquirers, pitched our tent in a grove of 
tamarind-trees, and there spent the first 
day. 
Several came to the tent and seeme 

much interested about their souls. The 
native preachers preached in the town 
and had a good hearing, sold several 
books, and at four o’clock, Pp. M., I, on my 
pony, started for Pondelah, a distance of 
eighteen miles. When half an hour on 
my way I met three men, whom I recog- 
nized by their salaams and smiles as 
friends. I asked who they were and they 
answered, Christians, on their way to see 
me. They had heard that I was camped 
at Shemacoortee, and had come from their 
village, five miles south. We conversed a 
long time. They then went to speak 
with the native preachers, but not until 
they had invited me ten times or more to 
camp at their village on my return. I 
promised to do all I could; but as the 
Christians in fifty villages were pulling/ 
me in as many directions, I urged them 
not only to believe in Jesus, but also to 
believe that He is everywhere present 
and of course in their village, and could 
help them just as well without me as with 
me. 


Converts and Inquirers. An hour 
more, and I passed through Niputlapand, 
where several stanch Christians live, but 
darkness was coming on, and as they had 
probably not got home from their work 
yet, I passed through without stopping, 
and at eight o’clock drew up at a small 
store-house belonging to the Public Works 
Department, row vacated, in which I in- 
tended to pass the night and following day. 
A letter kindly furnished by the engineer 
in charge to the overseer soon gained me 


Mission to Teloogoos : — Letter from Mr. Clough. 


good road for seven or eight miles. 


[February, 


admittance to a comfortable room much 
cooler than a tent. The next evening I 
set out for this place, fifteen miles further 
on. At Cumbalpand, a village five’ miles 
from Pondelah, I stopped to preach and 
inquire after a few whoa year ago pro- 
fessed faith in Jesus. A congregation of 
a hundred or more, listened attentively, 
The few whom I particularly wished to 
see were present, but on account of caste 
and friends had grown cold and careless. 
They promised better things. At sunset 
I set out for this place, and two hours 
later was drinking a cup of tea under a 
large banyan-tree, near which I am yet. 
Ten or fifteen brethren soon came to bid 
me welcome to their village. We laid 
our plans for the next day. They went 
home and | into my cot to sleep, as all 
were too tired to pitch the tent. 

At an early hour next morning the 
Christians, quite a number of inquirers 
and others, were present. We met in 
the tent and talked, prayed and sang until 
we were tired. 


A Field white for Harvest. In the 
afternoon | visited them at their houses. 
A happy company they are, alive and at 
work for their Master. Yesterday, Sab- 
bath, I preached again in my tent in the 
morning, and under a tree in the alter- 
noon and evening, to sixty or seventy 
persons, twelve of whom wanted to be 
baptized. They are begying for a 
teacher here, and I am happy to say that 
a young man, Chiniah, supported by E. 
Osgoou’s 8. S. class, 2d Bap. ch., Chicago, 
now in the normal school, will soon come 
to live among and instruct them. 

A great field, all white for the reapers, 
is awailing him. It was my intention to 
start on to Cumbum this morning; but 
a heavy rain has prevented me. 

Cumbum, Sept. 8. — We left Nardpetta 
on the afternoon of the 6th, and had a 
We 
then came to the first spur of the Ghauts, 
fifty-oue miles from Ongole. ‘hus tar 
the country is one vast plain, dotted with 
villages and groves, with here and there 
a mound-like hill, some of which rise to 
the height of 2,000 feet above the sea. 
They are apparently of voleanic origin, 


Loe 
& 
“a 
Vg 
4 
q 
= 


1870.] 


but according to Hindu mythology they 
were dropped by Hunumuntudu (the 
monkey god) when he was conveying 
stones from the Himalaya mountains to 
bridge or fill up the straits between Cey- 
lon and the main-land, that he might pass 
over and regain Seta, Ramasawmy’s wile, 
from Ravenudu, who had stolen her. 

Two miles more and we were on the 
top of the hill, from which we had a beau- 
tiful view of the plains below, the valley 
of the Goondlacumma river and of other 
and much higher hills far to the west- 
ward. 

Another hour's ride and we were in the 
valley of the Goondlacunma, beyond the 
Nellore district. Our good road was 
gone, and we were compelled to procure 
a guide to lead us over the creeks and 
through the rice fields, which seemed 
quite numerous enough to suit us, as the 
night had set in dark and cloudy, and we 
were yet fifteen miles from Cumbum. 
Dreary though the way was, several 
little incidents cheered me greatly. The 
people who act as guides are usually of 
the poor class, and accompany the trav- 
eller to the next village, generally not 
more than one or two miles, when others 
are called. 

In one village, while the guide was 
getting ready, I began to talk to a few 
who cume out to see who the white man 
was. Soon the company had increased to 
forty or fifty. Among other things I 
assed if they had never heard of the 
missionary at Ongole, and if they had not 
seen Pariah and Ronduh (native preach- 
ers)? ‘* Yes, yes,” answered a dozen 
voices at once. ‘ Then you have heard of 
the true God and of Jesus our Saviour ? ” 
“ Yes, yes,” again they answered. “ Well 
then, why don’t you believe in Him ?” 
“We do believe some,” said they ; “ we 
want to believe more, and from this time 
we shall forsake the worship of idols,” 
ete. 


The Guide a Christian. The guide was 
ready and we went on. A long conver- 
sation with him satisfied me that what the 
people of his hamlet had told me was 
true, — that the guide was a Christian, 
and that many others were believing that 


Mission to Teloogoos : — Letter from Mr. Clough. 


47 


Jesus is the only Saviour of men and are 
earnestly seeking salvation through Him. 


Cheering Surprise. At ten o'clock we 
arrived at Cumbum Ravypand. The 
guide went to call some one to go with 
me to the city, two miles distant. The 
village was a quarter of a mile from the 
direct road. I dismounted, and was hold- 
ing my pony when I heard a noise as the 
running of a flock of buffaloes. I was 
about to lead the pony to one side to let the 
suppesed buffaloes pass, when I perceived 
that the noise was not made by buffaloes 
but by a company of twenty or thirty 
men. What was up I did not know ; but 
in a minute more they were all around 
me, and one or two were hugging me. 
Most of them were Christians. The man 
who came With me had told them that the 
missionary had come, and these actions 
showed their joy. I need not add that I 
had guides enough for the remainder of 
the way. They all wanted to go with 
me. 

At eleven o’clock we passed the gate 
and were in Cumbum. Five minutes 
more, and I was seated in the palace-like 
house occupied by Mr. Powell, assistant 
Superintendent of Police, and by the as- 
sistant Collector of Kurnoot district. 
These gentlemen had kindly invited me, 
though an entire stranger, to make their 
house my home while in the city. A cup 
of tea was soon ready, — acceptable 
enough after a ride of twenty-five miles. 

I have now been here “ spying out the 
land,” two days. Many English friends 
have been very kind indeed, and through 
them I have learned much, not only of 
the city, but people and country also. 
We have visited all the principal places 
in and around the town, the bazaar, the 
great tank and the new court-house, 
which is being built. This is to be an 
immense building, which is to be occupied 
as a court-house, police head-quarters, 
and treasury. It is built of stone, a Gothic 
structure fortified, and will, when com- 
pleted, cost about Rs. 60,000. 


The Cumbum Tank. But of all the 
sights of Cumbum, the great tank takes 
the precedence. It was formed by throw- 


‘ 
&§ 


48 Mission to Teloogoos :— Letter from Mr. Clough. [February, 


ing a dam across the Goondlacumwa river, poorer people for several months have 
which at this point passes through a gorge shown a great desire to learn about the 
perhaps a hundred yards wide. The dam true God, and not only to learn, but to 
is about 100 feet high, built of stone and believe also. Several times they have 
of great width. On it are idol houses, been into Ongole, and preachers have 
patron gods and goddesses in great num- visited them often, staying several days 
bers, cut from stones. The Collector has each time ; therefore we know them very 
also built a small house there. well. 
Above the gorge the hills gradually re- 
cede from the river, forming a basin,and Another Baptism. I came here this 
this, when full, t% the Cumbum lake, morning and found the tent ready for me, 
twenty-five or thirty miles in circumfer- the native preachers faithfully at work, 
ence. The tank was built by Varada and the Christians almost impatient be- 
Utchama, many years ago, no one I think cause I had stayed in the city so long, 
knows when, but probably before the But they little knew the importance of 
Mohammedan invasion. I inquired of my visit there to them, and so I’ hope to 
several intelligent natives about its his- many others also. People from Ravy- 
tory, etc., but was answered, “ How can I pand and also from the villages near, to 
tell?” ‘It was built in the beginning, the number of 150 or 200, have been 
I suppose,” meaning a great ‘while ago, present at our meetings to-day. Fifty or 
before the city. sixty of these wanted to be baptized. 
In honor of the builder, the farmers and With twenty-five of them we were ac- 
great numbers of others, assemble on the quainted, and knew of their faith, piety, 
dam or near it once each year, decorated and earnestness. ‘hese we received and 
with flowers, dance, sing, race with their at five this afternoon immersed them in 
bullocks, and do honor to Varada Utch- the Goondlacumma, thus dedicating it to 
ama, as one of their innumerable divinities. the Lord, and praying that hundreds and 
Bs thousands might soon follow. And they 
Population and Climate. The city con- They can’t help it. I think 
tains 10,000 or 20,000 people, no one sometimes that the Teloogoos must now 
knows how many. One half, perhaps, believe in Jesus, whether they want to or 
are Mohammedans. It is the official and not, because God’s time for saving them 
commercial town of one half of the Kur- has come. 
noot district, and must always be an im- 


portant place, but in some respects disa- Christians Persecuted. Markapoor, 10. 
greeable and unhealthful. Mosquitoes are —JI rode in from Cumbum Ravypand to 
very troublesome. Very many, natives this place, —this morning, — twenty miles 
as well as Europeans, suffer from a slow almost due north,—Tolny town (resi- 
intermittent fever, a type of jungle fever, dence of a native sub-magistrate) of con- 
peculiar to this place. On account of this siderable importance. Population, 4,000. 
fever and mosquitoes, I should not think it Living here are five or six Christians who, 
best for a missionary, should one come although much persecuted, are steadfast. 
here, to build in the city, but out about a I spent an hour listening to the story of 
mile, perhaps a little more, to the north, their wrongs, which, (old story to me 
on a high piece of ground, where our though it was,) almost made my blood 
friends here think there will be no mos- boil. The main points of the persecution 
quitoes, and but little to be feared from the may be told in a few lines. The Chris- 
Cumbum fever. tians refused to make a large drum, used 

Cumbum Ravypand, 9th. — This town by the village when they worshipped a 
is two miles below Cumbum, and has a certain idol. ‘lo punish them, several 
population of 3,000 or 4,000, and is noted policemen or other town-officials came to 
for the great number of Brahmins who their hamlet and stole one or two cow- 
live here, and as a resort for those suffer- hides; — stole, I said, — “ carried off by 
ing from the Cumbum fever. Here the force” would be a better phrase. The 


‘ 


wD 


a 
: 
4 
‘ 


1870.] 


Christians tried to get them back. This 
made the other party angry, and they 
beat one of the Christians very severely. 
The Christians then took the man who 
had been beaten, on a cot, and started for 
Cumbum to the Collector. Fearing that 
they would now get into trouble, they 
again fell upon the Christians, tied the 
bearers to posts, beat them, and then put 
them in prison. This done, they repaired 
to the Christians’ hamlet and arrested all 
the men whom they supposed to be Chris- 
tians — sixteen in all. The next day they 
were accused of almost everything, and 
witnesses brought forward toit. The sub- 
magistrate, a Brahmin, sentenced them to 
thirty days imprisonment with hard work. 
To make the insult greater, they were set 
to work on the Vishnu temple grounds, 
and were frequently asked, * How do you 
like being Christians? Will you learn to 
read now? We shall keep you here until 
your jululu (topknots) grow out,” ete. 

I intended to go to Loonkasol, eight 
miles west of here, this evening, where 
fifteen or twenty of our people live. But 
after consideration, I thought that a talk 
with the sub-magistrate might serve all 
parties better. ‘Therefore I sent a note, 
inviting him to come to my tent, (of course 
I could not go to his,—a Brahmin’s 
house.) He came. We had a long talk, 
in which he denied knowing that there 
. were any Christians in Markapoor, and 
knew nothing of the persecution, etc., in 
April ult. Of course these assertions 
were all lies. I gave him in conclusion 
some good advice which he promised to 
follow, saying that all Christians here and 
in my tolny, should be protected from in- 
sults and persecutions. His promise is of 
but little account. He is a mean, schem- 
ing, subtle Brahmin, and fear of the Col- 
lector only will keep him straight. 


Inquirers and Backsliders. I have 
just preached to a large company in the 
hamlet where the Christians live. Perse- 
cution has caused many who, a few 
months ago were hopeful inquirers, to 
turn away from the truth. Many of them, 
could they be sure of protection, would 
again openly profess faith in Jesus. I 
tried to suit my remarks to the people and 

VOL. L 


Mission to Teloogoos : — Letter from Mr. Clough. 


49 


the occasion. They were affected, some 
shed tears, and all promised to fear men 
less, and love the Saviour more. 

When I reach Ungole I shall send full 
particulars of their troubles, and how they 
were persecuted, to the Assistant Superin- 
tendent of Police, Cumbum. Some of the 
offenders will be punished, I think ; but 
so many witnesses can be bought for an 
anna each to swear to anything, that it 
is difficult to condemn any one who has 
either friends or money. I am now off for 
Garnegapenta, eight miles east of this. 


Faithful in Persecution, Garnegapenta, 
11.— On my way to this village last 
evening, I stopped at Venontaporum, two 
miles east of Markapoor, and preached. 
Seven or eight of our own people, that is 
Christians, live there, one of whom was so 
unfortunate as to be in Markapoor at the 
time of the affray in April last, and was 
put with the others referred to in my 
letter yesterday, in the jail. They have 
the same story of persecution to tell me, 
which I hear in half of the villages I visit. 
But they are all faithful, and say that they 
are determined to be so to the end. 


Christian Village. The Christians here 
at Garnegapenta were very glad to see me, 
and we have had a pleasant day together. 
I confess that I feel a little proud of them, 
because I see in imagination what India 
will be when Christianized. About one 
year ago they first began to believe in 
Jesus. Since that time some 25 from the 
Mardagie hamlet, which contains about 
200 people, have been baptized, and all 
but one or two individuals are nominal 
Christians. ‘They have built a neat little 
school-house at their own expense, and 
for six months have supported a teacher 
and sent regularly 20 or 25 scholars to 
school, who now are beginning to read 
pretty well. I have visited this school, 
and the hamlet, and the Christians in their 
houses, they showing me all the improve- 
ments they have made since they have 
left off worshipping idols. I was more than 
pleased. I was delighted, and, turning to 
a company of heathen who had come to 
look on from curiosity, I said, “ See their 
neat white houses, clean streets free from 


| 
= 
i 
H 
x 


50 


filth, this school-house and happy looking 
children and men. These are the results 
of Christianity. Look over all India, and 
you cannot find a heathen hamlet, not even 
among the Brahmins, that will compare 
with it.” One little mud-house looked 
neglected and was not whitewashed. It 
was their idol-house, built by their fathers. 
I asked why this remained in a Christian 
hamlet ? They said that they did not want 
it, wished it away, etc., but that if they 
pulled it down, the heathen would be 
very angry ; therefore they left it to fall 
down by the rains. 

Destroying an Idol Temple. I proposed 
that they should give me the job of destroy- 
ing it. This pleased them, and in a min- 
ute more a crowbar was put into my 
hands, and the work commenced. The first 
blow had hardly been struck before I had 
plenty of helpers; and, in less time than 
it takes me to write this, Ramasawmy’s 
house fell down and was thrown off as 
rubbish. In clearing away the dirt from 
the floor, two large slimy toads hopped off. 
Some one in the company, in irony, to 
the amusement of all, exclaimed, “ This 
is Ramasawmy and his wife ; pretty gods 
indeed. Let the heathen worship such if 
they will ; we don’t want you.” And the 
venerable couple were thrown among the 
rubbish. 

They then took me to a yard behind 
the houses, and showed me agrave. Sad- 
ly they spoke of the departed one, his 
faith, piety, etc. He was the first one in 
their village who believed in Jesus, and 
they looked upon him as their teacher. 
“ But see,” said they, “we laid his body 
north and south like the Mohammedans, 
and not as Christians lay their dead. We 
then did not know any better. We did 
not do as the heathen do, but sung and 
prayed and then placed him thus. Will 
this position make any <ifference with 
him?” “No, no,” I answered. “If he 
was such a man as you say, he is now 
with Jesus, and happy ; and when the an- 
gels speak to his bones, they will hear, no 
doubt. God will take care of him.” This 
gave the needed comfort, and I then went 
to see the mother of the departed friend 
and brother. She is an old woman and 


Mission to Teloogoos :— Letter from Mr. Clough. 


(February, 


entirely blind. I talked with her until 
I was convinced that she also loved Jesus, 
I was then about to go, when she began 
to weep. I asked why, and she sobbed 
out, “I want so much to see you.” A few 
words more, and the old woman was con- 
tented to wait until we meet in heaven, 


More Baptisms. Pondelah, 13.— At ' 
Yedaralapand we spent the Sabbath, 
About fifty wanted to be baptized. Four. 
teen were of that village, and the others 
from different places, from five to twenty 
miles distant. Most of the number were 
old men and women, or women with small 
children, who could not come so far as 
Ongole. Of the fifty, we received and 
immersed twenty-six in the Mooshe river, 
thus dedicating it to the Lord as we had 
the Goondlacumma at Cumbum Ravy- 
pand, a few days before. 

With other appropriate services we 
closed the labors of a happy day, bade the 
disciples and inquirers adieu and sent them 
away. 

This morning I started for this place, a 
distance of fifteen miles. Just as the sun 
was rising, I reached Dondlaroo, where 
we have another noble band of Chris- 
tians. I talked to them for an hour, and 
again gave the parting hand to warm- 
hearted brethren, and was soon cantering 
over the plain towards this place, where 
an hour later I arrived. I have just had , 
an interview with the sub-magistrate of 
this tolny, a Brahmin, but on the whole, 
a very respectable, honest man, for a 
heathen Hindu. In fact I have been ac- 
quainted with him two or three years, and 
he has proved himself friendly, and dis- 
posed to right on several occasions. 

I have laid the complaints of the Chris- 
tians before him in as plain and vivid a 
manner as I could ; also reminding him 
of the Queen’s proclamation, and picturing 
the folly and injustice of such persecutions. 
He has made good promises, says that he 
shall stop all such practices in a summary 
manner, ete. I think he will. 

Five or six persons from a village two 
miles east of Pondelah, have been in to 
see me to-day. They say they are Chris- 
tians. I shall look for them to come out 
fully on the Lord’s side soon. 


1 
a 
8 
I 
I 
( 
a I 
] 
4 
ge 
=, 
3 


1870.] 


Return to Ongole. Ongole, 16. — I ex- 

cted to be absent two or three days 
longer, but a heavy shower of rain wet all 
my traps, most of them thoroughly. We 
also thought the northeast monsoon had 
set in, and if so, we must make a forced 
march, or else, on account of the Mooshe 
river and other smaller streams, make 
calculations to stay away from home a 
month, more or less. It did not take me 
long to decide what was best, and the 
pony was brought up and I set out for 
home, thirty-two miles away. At Nipput- 
lapand I halted for a little while, and 
had a talk with the Christians. Among 
other things too numerous to mention, 
and not the least important, so the moth- 
ers thought, I had to provide names for 
two babies ; no one else can do that busi- 
ness to the satisfaction of Christian par- 
ents, but Mrs. Clough and myself. 

One young man of promise wanted to 
be permitted to come to Ongole and study 
in the Normal School. For mouths I 
have had my mind on him as a proper 
person to be a teacher, and have been 
waiting and watching for the Lord to 
give him a mind to come and learn. I 
need not say that I granted his request. 
I expect him here in a few days. After 
finishing my work at Nipputlapand, I 
again set out for Ongole, yet twenty 
miles away, and four hours later was at 
home. I look back upon the scenes of my 
late trip to Cumbum, with, I believe, a 
thankful heart and rejoice with trembling, 


Cumbum as a Missionary Station. Of 
Cumbum, the desirableness of our oceupy- 
ing it at once, or as soon as possible, as a 
mission station, according to my judgment, 
I cannot overestimate its importance. 
All I wrote in my letter of Feb. 10, is I 
think, true, except perhaps the city itself 
is not so large as I then stated, but the 
field is more extensive, and to the north 
and northwest, is almost literally ad in- 
Jinitum. 

Within twenty-five miles of Cumbum, 
one hundred members ef our church in 
round numbers live, and twenty or thirty 
almost in Cumbum itself, only from two 
to four miles away, and we expect that 
before this reaches the Rooms this num- 


Mission to Sweden : — Letter from Mr. Wiberg. 51 


ber will be doubled, perhaps tripled. I 
have just written to br. Jewett, and among 
other things, as near as I can remember, 
were these words: —] consider Cumbum 
the most inviting field for mission labor on 
the face of the earth, and perhaps facts 
would prove this sweeping assertion true, 
The importance of the field, the prospect 
of an abundant harvest soon, ete., are not 
the only things that should urge us on. 

The Christians and inquirers already 
there need the watch-care and protection 
which I, in Ongole, cannot give them, 
They are ignorant, and four tedious days’ 
journey distant. They are also in an- 
other district, like being in a different 
State, at home. To-day I am acquainted 
with the officials there ; and I have reason 
to believe they will see to it that Chris- 
tians may have justice. But perhaps to- 
morrow, and probably before another 
year, these men will be removed. 

Many of the officers sent to such places 
as Cumbum, are young lieutenants. If 
the missionary lives in the same town, they 
must and will hear him. So far as jus- 
tice to all parties is concerned, the officials 
must hear the discreet, sensible missionary, 
who understands his business and attends 
to it. 

In my letter of Feb. 11th, we here 
at Ongole offered ourselves for the Cum- 
bum field. We are as willing to go now 
as then, if it shall be the pleasure of the 
Executive Committee. 


to Sweden. 


LETTER FROM Mr. 


Pray for Sweden. Stockholm, Sept. 
20, 1869. — It is our earnest prayer that 
the Lord may add His richest blessing to 
the sums which have been so generously 
given to the different departments of the 
Swedish mission. We know full well that 
it is not by might, nor power, nor muney, 
that the kingdom of Christ will be ex- 
tended, but by the Spirit of the Lord. 
We therefore ask, as an additional favor 
on your part, that you may individually 
and at your religious gatherings remember 
in your prayers Sweden and the adjacent 


til 
18, 
an 
ed 
n- 
At’ 
h. 
rg 
é 
Ag 
d 
d 
e 
n ‘ 
n 
‘ 
- 
‘ 
f 
’ 
| 


52 


countries. We will, in return, not forget 
Germany, nor the Asiatic and African Mis- 
sions. There is One Eye that looks with 
undivided interest on all the Christian 
missions of the earth, and we are called to 
be His followers as beloved children, 


The Triennial Conference. I am now 
going to impart to the reader good news 
from this part of the great vineyard. We 
have great reason to thank the Lord that 
He is still manifesting His presence among 
us. Our last Triennial Conference of the 
Baptist churches in Sweden, was held at 
the Bethel Chapel in Stockholm, June 10 
-12. Sixty-four delegates were present, 
from the churches, and at least as many 
other guests from the churches outside of 
Stockholm. We had also the pleasure of 
seeing among us for the first time Baptist 
friends from Denmark and Finland. The 
presence of the friends from Finland was 
especially interesting, as they were the 
first-fruits of the truth in that country, 
and as they were, so to speak, flesh of our 
flesh and bone of our bones, being in fact 
a part of the Swedish nation, though liv- 
ing under another government. Many 
more from the churches in the northern 
provinces of SWeden would have attend- 
ed the Conference, but were prevented, 
as the sowing time was not yet over with 
them. 


Letters from the Churches — Revivals. 
The letters from the churches were left to 
committees, to be examined and digested, 
after which the committees, on the last day 
of the Conference, reported from the let- 
ters and from their personal knowledge, 
on the state of religion in the different As- 
sociations. Some letters were, on ac- 
count of their deep interest, read entire. 
One of these was from the church at 
Eskilstuna. This church was formed 
three years ago, and now numbers seven- 
ty-five members. It was composed mostly 
of poor day laborers ; but in their poverty 
they had contributed during the last two 
years 3,424 rix dollars, or $913 in gold, 
for the cause, and their efforts for the 
spread of the gospel had been crowned 
with abundant success. The account 
from Dala Association created the deepest 


Mission to Sweden : — Letter from Mr. Wiberg. 


[February 


jnterest. The only delegate sent from 
that Association, br. D. Eric Ericsson, 
had, eighteen years ago, been imprisoned 
twenty-eight days, to starve on water and 
bread for taking the Lord’s Supper with- 
out the pale of the State church. From 
this imprisonment, which is considered 
equivalent to capital punishment, he suf. 
fered, then only a youth, such a loss of his 
faculties as has not as yet been fully re- 
paired, 

With unusual clearness he now gave an 
account of a general revival which had 
taken place among all the Baptist churches 
in the north of Dalecarlia last winter, 
The revival commenced in the parish of 
Orsa, where several Baptist sisters were 
especially impressed with the duty of 
praying earnestly for the outpouring of 
the Holy Spirit. Special prayer meetings 
were held; the attendance increased more 
and more, and the revival fire spread 
from village to village. In one village 
alone 117 had professed to have received 
peace in believing. This Association was 
not the only one which had enjoyed a 
special revival. Several other regions of 
the country had been favored with ex- 
tended revivals. Thus in the province of 
Skane a general revival had taken place 
during the last two years, and hundreds 
had been added to the churches as the re- 
sult of the revival. 


Subjects of Discussion. On Thursday 
and Friday afternoons, questions regard- 
ing spiritual life, church polity, ete., were 
discussed. A subject of special interest 
for discussion was the new dissenter law, 
passed by the diet of 1868-9. Though some 
believed that the Baptist churches might 
adopt it as a stepping-stone to more ex- 
tended religious liberty, a vast majority 
expressed their opinion in the following 
resolution : — 


Resolved, though the Conference ac- 
knowledges that the proposed dissenter 
law, passed by the diet of 1868-9, in many 
important items is an improvement on 
the law of 1860, yet the Conference ex- 
presses its conviction that several para- 
graphs of said law contain enactments 
which do not agree with the 16th para- 
graph of the Constitution (granting full 


7 
4 
( 
| 
T 
a a 
0 
t 
§ 
t 
1 
0 
0 
c 
¥ 
is 
re 
n 
8 
d 
a I 


1870.) Mission to Sweden : — Letter from Mr. Wiberg. 53 


religious liberty, though made void by 
other contradictory statutes). Acknowl- 
edging no other head over a religious 
body but the Lord Jesus Christ, we find it 
to be a principal defect in the said pro- 

sed law, that the right of free worship 
is dependent on the option of the govern- 
ment. 

The Conference ventures to express 
the hope that the day is not far distant 
when all citizens, without regard to their 
religious creed, shall be vouchsafed per- 
fectly similar privileges, and when, con- 
sequently, no other law will be needed for 
dissenters than those which are valid for 
all Swedigh subjects. 


Stockholm Missionary Union. Another 
subject of special interest was the question 
of forming a new Missionary Society, 
which should consist of members of the 
churches in the whole country. But as 
there were several local Missionary Soci- 
eties formed in the country, besides which 
some of the Associations supported labor- 
ers to work within their respective dis- 
tricts, the time for such a Society seemed 
not as yet to have come. 

However, the members of ‘ The Stock- 
holm Missionary Union” who were pres- 
ent, informed the Conference that this 
Union had changed its Constitution, so 
that it now is a Baptist Missionary Soci- 
ety, and recommended it to the sympathy 
of the Baptist churches in the country in 
general, at the same time expressly de- 
claring that the object was aot to supplant 
other local Missionary Societies, but to 
collect missionary resources which other- 
wise would be lost. The delegates took a 
vote expressing their confidence in the 
Stockholm Missionary Union, and prom- 
ised to try to influence their respective 
churches to contribute to the funds of the 
Society. 

The Conference also resolved that 
“the Common Treasury of the Baptist 
churches” should be dropped, and be 
merged into the funds of the Stockholm 
Missionary Union. There remain con- 
sequently, only two treasuries that are in 
common for the Baptist churches in Swe- 
den, namely, the Building Fund and the 
Poor Fuad. 


Knowledge of the Bible. The last sub- 


ject of discussion had reference to a more 
deep and vital knowledge of the Holy 
Scriptures. As means for obtaining that 
end, were recommended a more faithful 
version of the Scriptures, Bible classes, and 
especially such Bible classes as should 
stand in connection with the Sunday- 
schools of the whole church, to live 
under the influence of the Holy Spirit 
and near to Christ, ete. 

A proposal was made to take measures 
for the publication of a new Hymn Book, 
adapted especially to the wants of the 
Baptist churches; but it was considered 
best to leave it to individual enterprise. 
Between the public discussions the dif- 
ferent committees worked with unresting 
zeal, so that very little time was left for 
rest or sleep. The prayer-meetings held 
every morning were real seasons of re- 
freshing. There was never any pause, 
neither was there any lack of order; but 
warm, heartfelt prayers were continually 
offered, and especially were the prayers 
for Finland fervent. 

In the evenings discourses were delivered 
by different brethren, and the meetings 
were well attended. 


Anniversary of the Union. On Sunday 
forenoon, June 13, the first church of 
Stockholm invited the delegates and other 
members of sister churches to take part in 
celebrating the dying love of our blessed 
Saviour. About 500 Baptists thus assem- 
bled around the communion-table. 

The Stockholm Missionary Union cele- 
brates its thirteenth anniversary. on Fri- 
day, June 11, in connection with the Con- 
ference. From its annual report it ap- 
peared that it had during the year sup- 
ported, either in whole or in part, eighteen 
evangelists who had labored in seven 
provinces. Among these Jaborers one 
had devoted his whole time as a city mis- 
sionary in Stockholm. During the win- 
ter vacation, nine of the students at the 
Bethel Seminary were supported by the 
Society to labor as evangelists in the prov- 
inces of Upland, Sodermanland, West- 
manland and Wermland. During al- 
most the whole year the Society had paid 
the travelling expenses for students of the 
Bethel Seminary and other brethren in 


54 Mission to Sweden: — Letter from Mr. Wiberg. 


Stockholm who have travelled out on 
Sundays to preach the gospel in the vi- 
cinity of Stockholm. Often four or five 
have gone out on the same Sunday and 
preached the gospel. The evangelists 
who have thus labored in connection 
with the Society have devoted their ser- 
vices especially to the Baptist churches, 
trying to strengthen them in their weak- 
ness and to extend their borders. And 
their labors have not been without fruit. 
Especially had that been the case in the 
province of Wermland, where the labors 
of br. E. M. Nilsson resulted in a remark- 
able revival. 

The Stockholm Missionary Union is 
also a Publication Society. During the 
past year it had published sixteen new 
tracts, 10,000 copies of each tract. It 
had circulated books and tracts to the 
value of 1,500 rix dollars ($400 gold) 
among them, 80,000 tracts gratis. 

The income of the Society during the 
year was 2,346 rix dollars ($625) and the 
expenses 2,491 dollars ($664.) Since 
the formation of the Society in 1856, it 
had issued about 1,362,000 copies of books 
and tracts, amounting to 11,690,000 pages. 
During the same time it had expended 15, 
592 rix dollars ($4,158) on colporteurs; 
19,899 rix dollars ($5,306) on books and 
tracts; and 9,819 rix dollars ($2,618) for 
heathen missions; in all 45,311 rix dol- 
lars, ($12,083. ) 


Stockholm Association. On Monday, 
June 14, the Stockholm Association cele- 
brated its seventh anniversary. Of the 
37 churches of which it is composed, 21 
were represented by delegates. Two 
churches had sent delegates who attended 
the Conference, but had not time to at- 
tend the Association. Direct communi- 
cation was however received from all the 
churches. Two new churches were re- 
ceived into the Association. The reports 
from the churches were of a varied in- 
terest. Most of the churches were suffer- 
ing from lack of pastors, but some were 
in a flourishing condition. Three breth- 
ren were appointed to travel among the 
churches and strengthen them. 


Converts from Finland. The interest 


[February, 


of all these meetings was very much 
heightened by the preseuce of some new 
converts to our faith and order, from Fip- 
land. One of these converts, Miss Anna 
Heikel, is already known to friends in 
America. ‘The light which the Lord had 
kindled in her own soul had through her 
begun to shine among her relatives and 
friends in Finland. In a letter, dated Ja- 
cobsstad, Finland, April 15, she wrote — 


“ Here in this region the cause of Christ 
seems to be gradually progressing. The 
sermons of Spurgeon and the ‘ Pilgrim 
Hymns,’ are blessed means in the hands of 
the Lord to the conversion of sinners, 
Again and again I have ordered these 
books (thirteen copies of Spurgeon’s Ser- 
mons have been circulated, and now 
again I have sent for twelve apne 
and where these sermons are to be found, 
the people gather, both in the country 
and the city, in the evening, when the 
day’s work is done, to read, sing and 
pray till late at night. Our meetings 
are largely attended, and so is our Sun- 
day-school. We have sometimes been 
invited into the country villages, where 
generally a great many people have as- 
sembled to hear the word of God. Among 
the farmers there are several brethren 


who lead in prayer at our meetings.” 


A Subject for Prayer. Among her 
friends in the country villages, she men- 
tions a remarkable character, a farmer by 
the name of Peter Stu Maow (Peter Great 
Martin). He seems to be a man un- 
commonly great in body and mind. Be- 
fore meeting with Miss Heikel, his mind 
had been spontaneously led to doubt the 
propriety of infant baptism. In meeting 
with Miss Heikel, he found a kindred 
spirit, and it was not long before he was 
fully convinced of his duty to receive 
Christian baptism. He had expressed a 
great desire to accompany Miss Heikel to 
the Conference, but was hindered. But 
in visiting Stockholm, she was accompa- 
nied by two of her own family, a brother 
and sister. These two I baptized in our 
chapel June 9th, and they were received 
as members of our church. A more in- 
teresting scene could scarcely be imagined. 
This step evidently cost br. Heikel a great 
sacrifice of feeling, and it was with great 
hesitation that he ventured to take this step, 
fearing that he would not hold out, He 


= 
is 
4 
4 
a 


1870.) Mission to Sweden: —Letter from Mr. Wiberg. 55 


js a very promising young man. He is 
studying for the degree of Master of Arts, 
but by becoming a Baptist he knows that 
the doors of promotion will be shut against 
him in Finland. May the Lord keep 
him steadfast in the truth, and make him 
a polished shaft. I recommend this young 
brother to the fervent prayers of the 
churches and the brethren in America. 
With the blessing of God and proper train- 
ing, he may become the Apostle of Fin- 
land. 


Baptism in Finland. In one of his 
letters, the Secretary remarked that he 
would be afraid to send a Swede to Fin- 
land at this juncture, lest it might be like 
Uzzah laying hands on the ark. This 
remark seems fully borne out by ,subse- 
quent events. It seems evidently to be 
the purpose of the Lord to carry out His 


work in Finland through native agencies.” 


No sooner had the brother and sister 
Heikel returned home from the Confer- 
ence, than we hear of a baptism per- 
formed on the shore of Finland, by a 
native of Aland. But I wish to commu- 
nicate this remarkable event in the 
graphic style of Miss Anna Heikel. In 
a letter dated July 19, she says, — 


“ Saturday evening, our brother Valin 
arrived from Aland. He came just as 
the people were gathered to our meeting. 
We had a precious season. Late in the 
evening my mother, Antonetta, Thure, br. 
Valin, Miss Maria Ekgvist, and myself, 
went out twelve miles into the country to 
visit Stor Mans, who had invited us to stay 
with him over Sunday. On Sunday fore-- 
noon we assembled in one of the Sunday- 
school rooms, which for the occasion was 
_ dressed with leaves and flowers. In the 
afternoon br. Valin preached in the open 
air to a large number of people who had 
assembled to listen, some from curiosity, 
but the greater part, I believe, from real 
desire and longing to hear good news of 
salvation through Christ alone. It was 
very pleasant to find that all were so 
quickened that they could scarcely separ- 
ate. Br. Thure, too, addressed the peo- 
ple. Finally, the little deaf and dumb 
boy from Lapland, whom I had put out to 
board in the country, was allowed to bear 
witness to the wonderful power and love 
of the Lord, by explaining through signs 
the meaning of the Bible pictures which 


he had received as a present from Stock- 
holm. On Monday morning a mass of 
people assembled for prayer, singin 
npn and conversation. They woul 
y no means allow us to separate. Br. 
Valin was greatly astonished as well as 
rejoiced to see such a great desire for the , 
word of God and such ardent love. The 
people vied with each other in endeavor- 
ing to provide for our entertainment, and 
to furnish us with horses for our home- 
ward journey. It is indeed blessed to be 
a partaker when the Lord works such 
wonderful things. Many professed to en- 
joy peace and joy in the Holy Spirit. 
The State church seems also to become 
more and more distasteful to them ; and 
the subject of baptism as well as free 
church government seems to be of more 
and more consequence. May the Lord 
Himself direct all according to His wis- 
dom, 

“On Tuesday afternoon our family 
circle met at our home. Br. Victor read 
aloud the tract —* How shall I honor Jesus 
to-day ?’ which gave occasion to a lively 
conversation on the subject of religion. 
At a later hour in the evening Stor Mans 
and Miss Maria Ekgvist gave in their expe- 
rience for baptism. Though we are not 
formed into a church, yet on account of 
brn. Valin and Victor who were unac- 
quainted with the candidates, we would 
not that they should be baptized without 
having become better acquainted with 
them, and with what the Lord had done for 
them. Thus in listening to their experi- 
ences, we found great cause of rendering 
thanks and praises to the Lord for the love 
and faithfulness wherewith He seeks and 
cares for His own, and we were together 
till late in the night, conversing on the 
mercy the Lord had shown us. 

“ The following day, July 14, our friends 
were baptized in the forenoon. We were 
sitting there in the forest near to the shore, 
a small band, unseen by the world, but 
not forgotten by Him who says, ‘ Where 
two or three are convened in my name, 
there I am in the midst of them.’ Victor 
read from the New Testament sore pas- 
sages which treat on baptism, among oth- 
ers, the beautiful passage in Acts8. We 
sang, prayed and praised the Lord who 
had called even us‘ who are afar,’ after 
which our friends Stor Mans, and Miss 
Maria Ekgvist were buried with Christ in 
the open sea, and rose happy, to walk in 
newness of life. 

“ Thus the first baptism according to the 
commandment of Christ had been per- 
formed on the shore of Finland. It was 
something strange to know this to be the 


56 Mission to Sweden : — Letter from Mr. Truvé. 


fact, and we felt it to be an earnest that 
the Lord would cause His kingdom to go 
forward and raise up many churches for 
Himself. This will indeed be done. 

“ Thursday evening we had again a 
meeting. A great many assembled ; some 
came on foot a distance of twelve miles, 
though it was in the busy harvest season. 
They laid aside their scythes and went 
away; they could not do otherwise, they 
said. Brn. Valin and Victor preached 
from Heb. 10. Several have professed to 
receive great benefit from the word thus 
spoken. 

“ At the close ofthe meeting we who had 
the great privilege of having been bap- 
tized into one body, met to break bread 
and.eat with each other, rejoicing and 
praising God our Saviour who had bought 
us with His blood. It was a very happy 
season. The Lord does indeed exceed- 
ing abundantly above what we can ask 
or think. Thirteen months ago, baptism 
and church polity were things quite un- 
known here. Victor alone had then taken 
the important step. Now we were sitting 
here, seven baptized brethren and sisters, 
and celebrated the dying love of our Sav- 
iour just in Jacobsstad, the centre of Fin- 
land. Is not our God a wonderful God ? 
His greatness is not less here than any- 
where else. Praised be His holy name! 
How could I expect any such thing last 
winter, though I prayed to the Lord to 
raise up a church for Himself even here ? 

“ The same night we accompanied br. 
Valin to the steamboat. He could not 
stay away any longer from his home.” 


What hath God wrought? Thus runs 
the letter from sister Heikel. This is in- 
deed a wonderful chapter in the history 
of the good cause in Finland. Who is 
this br. Valin, who like Philip in the wil- 
derness, was called to go to~Finland and 
baptize, and’ then was so suddenly taken 
away ? Some twelve years ago some poor 
persecuted Baptists from the island of 
Aland, were seen walking the streets in 
the town of Abo. They had been sum- 
moned to appear before the consistory of 
Abo, to answer the charges of having 
fallen from the true evangelical doctrine, 
and embraced the heresy of the Anabap- 
tists. Not without fear (for they did not 
know whether they should not be ban- 
ished to Siberia,) did they appear before 
the consistory. They were examined, 
and their case was left to be decided 


[February, 


by higher tribunals. Among those thus 
examined was our br. Valin. And one of 
the examiners in the consistory was Prof, 
Heikel, the father of these brothers and 
sisters Heikel, who have lately put on 
Christ by baptism. As the poor Alanders 
were leaving the consistory, Prof. Heikel 
asked them in a friendly manner, to call 
at his house. They thought, what does it 
mean? Does he intend to make some 
further inquiries, in order to make the 
sentence against us more sure ? In eall- 
ing, however, they were happily disap- 
pointed. The professor entertained them 
with food, and treated them in the most 
friendly manner. His children, then 
young, were witnesses to all this, and they 
received a favorable impression of the 
Baptists which has followed them up to 
the present moment. 


* The Cause in Stockholm. There is noth- 
ing of. special interest to relate as regards 
the work in Stockholm. Our meetings 
continue to be well attended, though asa 
matter of course the congregations are al- 
ways smaller in summer time. During 
the last three months thirteen have been 
added by baptism to the 1st church, and 
several are waiting to receive the ordi- 
nance. But during the present year we 
have already lost twenty-three of our 
number through emigration to America. 
It seems that we shall have plenty to do 
hereafter to fill up the ranks at home 
after those who are constantly going to 
the United States. But in this, too, the 
wise and merciful providence of God is 
manifested. No, America is going to be 
the world, par excellence ; and therefore 
the Lord continues to send the cream as 
well as the dregs of the nations of Europe 
to your country. The Baptists of Ger- 
many, Sweden and other countries are 
the New England Puritans of the present 
century, and will exert an influence that 
shall tell on the destinies of coming gener- 
ations that shall fill that happy land. 


FROM Mr. TrvuvE. 


Progress in Gottenburg. Gottenburg, 
Oct. 5, 1869.— I have continued to work 


a 
tl 
I 
c 
= 
=" 
& 
3 


1870.] 


as usual, and have during this quarter of 
the year been at Gottenburg all the while. 
I think it is my duty to do here what I 
can. 
missionary tours this winter more than 
before. 

We have a hope of hiring a hall in one 
of the suburbs of the city, and commence 
to work there this winter. There are 
16,000 people in that part, and no place 
where they can hear the gospel except in 
one Lutheran church, and the priest 
there is apparently not a Christian. That 
part is called Majoona, and has been a 
city by itself till last year it was united 
with Gottenburg. It is more than a 
mile out of the main city. It is certainly 
good to have such halls where the people 
can be reached. But in Gottenburg the 
people are more proud than anywhere 
else in the world, and consider it a shame 
to go in through a gate and up into the 
second story in a private house to hear 
preaching, and we hear it said every 
week, “If you had a chapel, Gottenburg 
would be the place for you to work in.” 


Promising Converts. Since I wrote 
last, God has blessed our work to the con- 
version of several. Some of them have 
left for America, to avoid the temptations of 
their former friends and get their living for 
themselves and their families. There they 
have been baptized and become members 
of the church. Two of them are young 
men, twenty and twenty-three years old. 
They are very promising, and I hope the 
church will have a great help. They 
have already commenced to teach in the 
Sunday-school, and one of them desires to 
go to the Seminary in Stockholm, and 
study for the ministry. We have thus far 
great reason to thank God and take cour- 
age. I have commenced with a Bible 
class Sunday evenings. It is well at- 
tended and seems to be of great use. The 
people of this place have need of some 
thing of this kind, because they have 
never had any Sunday-schools as in 
America. 

Many of the students in the college 
eome and hear me, and attend our meet- 
ings, which I consider a good sign. I hope 
they may get some Christian views, and 


Mission to Germany —_ Letter from Mr. Oncken. 


I hope however to be able to make ~ 


57 


liberal ideas presented to them. May 
God make me wise to win souls. My de- 
sire is to do good as much as possible. 


HAissfon to Germany. 
Lerrer FROM Mr. ONCKEN.! 


A Whole Town become Baptists. Alt 
Danzig, Oct. 4, 1869. —I thought my en- 
gagements of yesterday would be the end 
of my work here, but the brethren insist 
upon my remaining yet another Sunday, 
as some matters still remain to be set in 
order which could not be done yesterday 
on account of the examination of candidates 
for baptism. I shall therefore pass next 
Sabbath here in Alt Danzig and shall then, 
accompanied by br. Pritzkau, proceed to 
Einlage, 240 versts from here. The 
Lord’s day, yesterday, was to me a day 
never to be forgotten. At 9 o'clock the 
church bells began to ring for our ser- 
vices ; they are now used for no other 
purpose, and the Lutheran pastor of the 
town has left his whole flock to their fate. 
Infants are not sprinkled any more at all, 
and the pastor of the Baptist church, br. 
J. Pritzkau, is registrator, and enters all 
births, deaths, and marriages which take 
place, into his registry. Hitherto our 
brethren have not made use of the church, 
but assemble in the school-house of the 
place; but as almost all the country people 
are baptized, and they have the church at 
their disposal, I dare say it will not be 
long before the Baptists will conduct Di- 
vine service there. I was fully occupied 
all the day. Preached in the morning 
and afternoon to large assemblies. Among 
my hearers were Russians and Poles be- 
longing to the nobility, who had come in 
their Russian droschkes drawn by four 
horses abreast. These strangers had come 
chiefly to witness the baptism, but were 
disappointed, because the’ baptism could 
not take place until nine in the evening. 
Between the services I had to examine 
twelve candidates for baptism, who were 


1 The first part of this letter is dated one week 
earlier than the communication from Mr. O- 
published in January; but its contents are too 
interesting to be omitted. 


58 Mission to Germany: —Letter from Mr. Oncken. 


received by the church, and several oth- 
ers who were not reeeived. 


Baptism by Torchlight. Between eight 
and nine o'clock, Pp. M., we went forth to 
the water. The whole village was assem- 
bled there, but perfect order prevailed, 
and the baptism took place without any 
mishap. My own costume on the occasion 
as well as the costumes of the candidates 
— the latter consisting of the strangest old 
garments, — would have elicited a smile 
from the dear Hamburg people. Fortu- 
nately it was dark, and only the light of a 
few lanterns afforded me a glimpse of the 
curious figures before me. All the can- 
didates were exemplary in their deport- 
ment, and in half an hour later, the school- 
house was a third time filled with devout 
hearers and communion guests. We en- 
joyed blessed moments of direct commu- 
nion with our risen Lord and with each 
other. 


A Russian Church. From far and near 
brethren and sisters had hastened hither ; 
they had come even from Odessa. Among 
the Russian population the Lord’s work 
is likewise progressing. Twenty-seven 
persons have already been baptized. 
They form a separate church, although 
they have fraternal intercourse with their 
German brethren. I recommend the 
movement among the Russians to the spe- 
cial intercession of the church. If the au- 
thorities ignore this movement, then a fire 
may be kindled by it, which no power of 
the earth shall be able to extinguish. 
Ever since my visit to St. Petersburg, I 
have cherished the pleasing hope that the 
Lord would gather a great people to Him- 
self in this vast empire. 


Two new Churches Organized. Nov. 
13, 1869. — I have now been engaged in 
mission work six weeks, preaching among 
the German colonies, composed of Luth- 
erans, Calvinists, Mennonites and Baptists, 
located in the two governments of Elisa- 
bethgrad and Jecaterinoslav. I have met 
everywhere with a favorable reception, 
received much personal kindness and hos- 
pitality, and was helped on my way 
through the immense dreary and dusty 
prairies with horses and carts furnished 


(February, 


by kind and generous brethren, thus 
greatly reducing my travelling expenses, 
Notwithstanding the fatigue and discom. 
forts of travelling, I have met with no 
interference from the imperial government, 
Forty believers, Germans, have been bap- 
tized. Two churches, numbering 300 bap. 
tized, have been formed, and pastors and 
deacons have been ordained over them. 
Br. Johan Pritzkau, who was under my in- 
struction for a year at Hamburg, and who 
was ordained as pastor over the church at 
Alt Danzig, is the right man for the im- 
portant work assigned to him over the first 
New Testament church in the vast empire. 
The Lutheran worship in this village has 
been given up, and he has been chosen by 
the unanimous voice of the villagers as 
the religious instructor of their children. 


Russians Baptized. There is no doubt 
that an investigation into the above move- 
ments will be made; but I think it will not 
provoke any persecution as far as the 
Germans are concerned. In the immedi- 
ate vicinity of Alt Danzig however, about 
twenty-eight Russians, formerly slaves, 
have been baptized and thus left the 
church, A strict investigation has already 
been entered upon, and these poor breth- 
ren may have to pass through severe trials, 
perhaps banishment. I commend them 
to the prayers of our brethren in the 
United States. Interesting and valuable 
connections have been formed in differ- 
ent parts, by which Scriptures, tracts and 
good books will in future be widely circu- 
lated, both in the German and Russian. 

Here I have preached for the last eight 
days nearly every night to an interesting 
class of German mechanics, — among them 
from seventy to a hundred believers, and 
mostly convinced of the Scriptural views 
we entertain of believers’ immersion ; but 
they are afraid of the consequences of 
obedience to the Divine command, as 
they do not have the same civil rights as 
the colonists. I have received much per- 
sonal kindness from these brethren, and 
hope that with the Divine blessing my 
ministry will prove to have been owned 
by the Master. 


Plans of Journeying. My work here, 
as far as I can see, will close to-morrow, 


43 
i 
7 
4 
ele 


1870.) Miscellany : - 


when I propose, with a few baptized broth- 
ers and sisters, to commemorate the Sav- 
jour’s death, and toward the close of the 
Sabbath give my farewell address to the 
above believers, and then on the morrow, 
D. V., proceed with an Austrian steamer 
across the Black Sea to Tultscha in Turkey, 
and after visiting the little banished 
church from Russia, proceed to Bucharest 
in Bulgaria, and homeward pass through 
Hungary and Austria, where I pray the 
Lord may have work ready for me. 


Obituary of Rev. Baron Stow, D. D. 


59 


Theological Instruction at Hamburg. 
We are now erecting at Hamburg a story 
over our old chapel, as our first college, 
and, D. V., in the course of the ensuing 
year, so soon as we have the pecuniary 
means, we shall commence a course of in- 
struction with probably twenty breth- 
ren, recommended to us by their re- 
spective churches. Without some pecu- 
niary aid from America however, we 
shall not be able to carry out our pur- 


pose. 


OBITUARY OF aS BARON STOW, 


Rev. Baron Stow, D. D., was born in 
Croydon, N. H., June 16,1801. His par- 
ents soon after removed to Newport, in 
the same State, where he passed his early 
youth. He graduated at Columbian col- 
lege, Washington, in December, 1825, and 
remained in that city for two years as 
editor of the Columbian Star. He began 
to preach at the early age of seventeen 
years, and was ordained pastor of the Bap- 
tist church, in Portsmouth, N. H., Oct. 24, 
1827, where he remained about five years. 
He was installed pastor of Baldwin Place 
church, Boston, in Nov. 1832, and re- 
moved to Rowe St., now Clarendon St., 
in 1848. His entire ministry in Boston 
embraced a period of nearly thirty-six 
years. He was Recording Secretary of 
the Baptist General Convention from 
1838 to 1846, when the Society was 
merged in the American Baptist Mission- 
ary Union, and he was also a member of 
its Executive Committee for thirty-three 
years. He was three times elected Cor- 
responding Secretary; but his preference 
for the pastoral work led him to decline 
the office. At the time of his death he 
was also President of the Board of Trus- 
tees of Newton Theological Institution, 
and a member of the Board of Fellows of 
Brown University. He gave himself to the 
cause of ministerial education as much as if 
it were among the duties expected of him 
by his people ; and he cared for missions 
as much as if the cares of a parish were not 
on him. Every page of the Records at the 
Missionary Rooms bears the evidence of 


MISCELLANY. 


his mind and heart, and a fearful chasm 
would yawn should all he has done for the 
cause of missions be eliminated. He has 
determined its entire working more than 
any other one man. He will live in the 
missionary movement, as well as in the 
educational, not simply as remembered, 
but as an indestructible force, so long as 
they shall work out their grand results in 
an ever enlarging sweep, with their efli- 
ciency increased by his practical wisdom 
and his self-denying devotion. 

He was eminently able in the pulpit, 
and his ministry was honored with dis- 
tinguished success. He was a most effec- 
tive speaker. The spacious house in 
Baldwin Place was thronged with ad- 
miring listeners Sabbath after Sabbath. 
He was full of vital energy. His eye 
sparkled with animation. His clear, sono- 
rous, ringing voice fell delightfully upon 
the ear. There was a resistless power in 
his eloquence like the sweep and swell of 
an ocean wave. He had his audience 
completely at his command, moving them 
to alternate smiles and tears, and like a 
skilful helmsman, turning them at will 
“ whithersoever the governor _listeth.” 
And what is better still, the secret of his 
power was that he walked with God. He 
lived near to the cross. He went from 
his knees into the pulpit, and spoke under 
the influence of an unction from the Holy 
One. Hence he obtained what his heart 
most desired, not praises for himself but 
trophies for his Master, penitential tears, 
rejoicing converts and souls redeemed. 

His theology was of the strictest evan- 
gelical type. He held strongly to the Cal- 


60 Miscellany : — Obituary of Rev. Baron Stow, D. D. 


vinism of Fuller, and the better class of 
the New England school, as generally em- 
bodied in the confessions of our churches. 
He was moreover a Baptist, standing by 
the peculiar views of the denomination as 
to the scriptural subjects and mode of bap- 
tism, and maintaining them in all their 
length and breadth with well defined clear- 
ness and inflexible tenacity. There was 
a spirit in him that would have carried 
him to the stake, and crowned him with 
the glory of martyrdom, for an iota of 
scriptural truth, had he been asked to 
deny or renounce it; in the true spirit of 
that gentle saint of the olden time, who 
on the way to the stake declared, “I can- 
not contend for Christ, but I can die for 
Him.” He was zealous, not so much for 
the growth of a sect, as for the spread of 
the truth as it is in Jesus; not merely for 
the success of a peculiar form of church 

polity, but for the enlargement of Chris- 
tian charity. He aimed at no party 
triumph, but at the renovation of all men, 
and the diffusion of love and good will 
throughout the world. Rarely, if ever, 
was his voice heard among the disputes 

of this world. He shrank from contro- 
versy, and held himself aloof from polem- 
ical strife. So marked has been his en- 
tire course in this respect, that those who 
knew not the depth of his personal con- 

victions, and the loyal spirit that animated 

him, have sometimes regarded him as 
timid, if not lax, in his devotion to his pro- 

fessed principles. 

His intellectual character was well de- 
veloped and generally well balanced, only 
that he was too sensitive for his own happi- 
ness. His literary taste was keen and cor- 
rect ; his style neat, clear, and calm. He 
was a wise critic, even in poetry, though 
he never wooed the Muse. 

He was distinguished for his ability in 
reducing the opinions uttered in debate 
to compact form and rendering them in 
exact expression. In this department his 
pen was most useful to his brethren in the 
debates of committees, and in deliberative 
assemblies. He had an intuitive faculty of 
catching the important features of a dis- 
cussion, and harmonizing the divergent 
elements by a method of presentation in 
which all could agree. His short pithy 


[February, 


paragraphs in the religious journals were 
highly prized. He was connected for the 
last two years of his life editorially with 
the Christian Watchman and Reflector, 
and also contributed occasionally to other 
denominational papers. 

Dr, Stow was something more, some- 
thing better than a brilliant genius or a 
profound intellect. He was great in his 
moral stature, in the probity of his nature, 
in the purity of his life, and in the cireum- 
spectness of his conduct. He was a liv- 
ing epistle read and known of men. And 
the grand volume of character which his 
life unfolded and his death completed, 
may be studied with advantage, nay, will 
be studied, by generations to come. It is 
unique, individual, strongly marked ; 
never will it disappear from sight in the 
confusion of the common mass. And this 
benignant, just, honorable character is 
secure against the chance of future failure. 
The able preacher, the faithful pastor, the 
public-spirited benefactor, the wise coun- 
sellor, the upright man, the constant 
friend, these are henceforth as fixed in 
our memories, as they have been dear to 
our hearts. 

His last illness was brief and his de- 
parture sudden. He was unable to tread 
his accustomed paths for about three weeks 
only ; and, though his friends did not ap- 
prehend a fatal termination, he evidently 
anticipated and was prepared for it. He 
indicated his wishes in regard to his fune- 
ral, and the brethren whom he desired to 
participate in the exercises. A few days 
before his death he was assisted to go from 
his chamber to his study, where he gave 
some directions concerning his books, 
looked lovingly round upon them and bade 
them an affectionate farewell, — waving 
his good-bye to them as he left the room, 
and he never entered it again. He was 
unconscious of pain for a few hours after 
he was smitten with the apoplectic attack 
which ended his days, and so passed from 
the griefs and trials, the activities and joys 
of earth to the Christian minister’s reward. 

He was one of the best and purest of 
men, a bright ornament of the Christian 
ministry, an honor to his denomination, 
who have always appreciated his worth 
and who will not fail to cherish his memory 


‘ 
= 


1870.] 


among their choicest treasures. He has 
passed through a long life without a stain 
upon his moral character, without a blem- 
ish upon his reputation. 

Dr. Stow will be mourned not alone by 
the community, where he spent the larger 
portion of his life, and which he served in 
so many ways ; not alone by his own de- 
nomination, to whose prosperity in all the 
elements of real growth he devoted his 
best energies, but throughout the land, and_ 
by all who revere goodness and prize in- 
tegrity of heart. His name has gone out 
through the land as a symbol of strength, 
and his death will cause a pang to all 
lovers of good men. 


BUDDHISM—ITS LITERATURE, ORIGIN AND 
DOCTRINE 

M. Berghaus is quoted by Professor 
Max Maller as estimating the Buddhists 
at 312 per cent. of the human race, the 
Christians at 30-7, the Mohammsedan at 
15:7, the Brahminists at 13:4. 

Nepaul, Burmah and Siam, Ceylon, 
Thibet, Mongolia, and China, are the 
countries where Buddhism is in the as- 
cendant, and from whence the informa- 
tion has been derived which Oriental 
scholars, after years of toil, are now pre- 
senting to the cognizance of European 
readers. Of these sources, the monaste- 
ries of Nepaul have yielded the most valu- 
able materials ; for while the other coun- 
tries named possess only translations of the 
Buddhistic documents, those of Nepaul are 
written in the original Sanscrit, from 
which the rest were derived. In 1824, 
Mr. Hodgson, political resident of the 
Company in Nepaul, procured a catalogue 
of all the works still in existence which 
form the Buddhist canon, and copies of a 
considerable number, written, not in the 
spoken language of the country, but, as 
said before, in Sanscrit. Some of these 
documents had existed in the monasteries 
of Nepaul since the second century of our 
era, while the whole collection, some cen- 
turies later, was translated into the lan- 
guage of Tibet. Curiously enough, about 
the time of Mr. Hodgson’s discovery, a 
Hungarian, Alexander Csoma de Koros, 
was engaged in exploring the Tibetan 


Miscellany : — Buddhism — Its Literature, Origin, ete. 


61 


books of the Buddhists. It gives one 
some conception of the vastness of this lit- 
erature, when we read that one collection 
consists of 100 or 108 folio volumes, an- 
other of 225 such volumes. To translate 
the whole of this “ jungle of religious liter- 
ature,” was too much even for Csoma, but 
he gave a most valuable analysis of its con- 
tents (published in the 20th volume of the 
“ Asiatic Researches”), and translated 
enough to show that it was derived from 
the Sanscrit originals of Nepaul. 

The letter sent by Mr. Hodgson to Cal- 
cutta, to London, and to Paris, fell into 
the hands of M. Burnouf at Paris, who, 
after seven years of careful study, pub- 
lished in 1844 his introduction to the his- 
tory of Buddhism. By his astonishing in- 
dustry he had learned not only Sanscrit, 
but the Tibetan, Pali, Singhalese, and Bur- 
mese languages, in order to equip him- 
self for his task. His death in 1852 left no 
one of equal knowledge in the field: but 
he had prepared materials for a successor, 
M. Barthelemy Saint Hilaire, who was fa- 
miliar with Sanscrit, and famous as a 
philosopher. He has become the first his- 
torian of Buddhism, and to his conclusions 
Professor Muller refers as his main author- 
ity. 
Of the other Buddhist countries before 
mentioned, Burmah and Siam may be ex- 
pected to yieled a rich supply of materials 
for the scholar. The immense difficulty of 
grappling with the Chinese language when 
used as a medium of translation seems not 
yet to have been mastered. But Ceylon 
became, through the labors of Mr. Tur- 
nour, continued by Mr. Gogerly, and the 
Rev. Spence Hardy, another main source 
of information concerning Buddhism, Mr. 
Turnour having discovered the Pali trans- 
lation of the Buddhist books, existing in 
that ancient sacred language of Ceylon 
from an early period of our era. When 
we add that a Russian scholar, Schmidt, 
has translated part of the Mongolian 
canon, we must leave this part of our sub- 
ject with Professor Muller’s remark that, 
after centuries in which no single original 
Buddhistic document had been accessible 
to European scholars, the short space of 
ten years witnessed the recovery of four 
complete literatures of that system. But 


62 


to gain any idea of the labors which this 
entailed, the reader must consult the Pro- 
fessor’s papers in the book, Chips from a 
German Workshop. 

It is impossible to present, in a few lines, 
any condensed account of the nature of 
Buddbi-m, as these documents have partly 
revealed it. — Following, in the main, the 
guidance of St. Hilaire, Professor Muller 
teaches us that Buddha was probably the 
son of a Nepaulese king, and lived in the 
early part of the fifth century before 
Christ. Renouncing the world, he gave 
himself up to a life of meditation, travel- 
ling through various parts of India, in or- 
der to learn from the Brahmanic teach- 
ers. — Neither their speculative doctrines 
nor their ascetic precepts satisfied him, 
while he broke, and. encouraged others to 
break, their laws of caste. His own sys- 
tem may be regarded from two different 
aspects. As it exists in the philosophical 
writings of himself or his immediate fcl- 
lowers, it is a system of subtle, metaphysi- 
cal speculation, ending in absolute Athe- 
ism, indeed, in Nihilism, or the negation of 
all Being. Professor Muller controverts 
the statement that Buddha’s Nirvana — 
the absorption of the soul — is consistent 
with a belief in its continued existence, 
and regards this portion of his speculations 
as resulting in complete Atheism, and in 
the doctrine of annihilation. But, side 
by side with these dreary metaphysics, 
Buddh maintained the purest system of 
morality that has been ever promulgated 
among mankind, apart from the revelation 
made to the Hebrews and completed by 
Christ. To this practical teaching, and 
no doubt to the sincerity with which it 


Donations. 


[February, 


has been exemplified, the wonderful influ- 
ence of Buddhism is probably due.— 
Mankind, as a mass, are little affected by 
speculation, but much by a genuine at- 
tempt at holiness. And though it is often 
truly said that heathen systems are defi- 
cient in the motive power supplied by the 
Gospel, it must not be forgotten that, in 
the very exhibition of a high ordeal of pu- 
rity and charity, there is an attractive 
power which appeals to the best and deep- 
est principles of human nature. In an- 
other point, the disciples of Buddha have 
strayed far from his precepts. So far from 
being atheists, they worship Buddha him- 
self. Here, tov, nature has been stronger 
than speculation. — Dr. Mullens. 


SAILING OF MISSIONARIES. 


Rev. J. R. Haswell and family sailed 
from New York, Nov. 30, 1869, returning 
to their field in Maulmain. They were 
accompanied by Moung Kyau and wife, 
native Burmans, who have been for some 
time pursuing a course of education in this 
country. 


Rev. Dr. Bronson and daughter of the 
Mission to Assam, and Rev. E. B. Cross 
and wife, of Toungoo, sailed from New 
York, Dee. 15, to rejoin their Missions 
respectively. 

Rev. Messrs. John McLaurin, Melvin 
Jameson and Stephen B. Rand, with their 
wives, sailed from New York, Dec. 22,— 
Mr. McLaurin and wife to join the Mis- 
sion among the Teloogoos, the others 
designated to the Missions in Burmah. 


DONATIONS RECEIVED IN DECEMBER, 1869. 


MAINE, 

Topsham, David Scribner 

Warren, Ladies’ Bap. For. Miss. Soc., 
Mrs. A. Richardson tr., 

Kennebunk Village, ch. 

No. Sedgwick, Mrs. 8. A. A. Cor- 
thell 

Newport, Samuel E. Pray 

Mt. Vernon, ch., 8. 8. 

Gardine:, Bruuswick St. ch., A. E. 
Wing tr., 


BE 
S 383 $3 8 


NEW HAMPSHIRE. 
New London, Literary and Scientific 
Inst. 


a 
R 


Meredith Asso. 
Henniker, a friend 


VERMONT. 
Saxton’s River, ch., tow. sup. of nat. 
pr., 
West Fairfax, a friend 


20 00 
45 00 


MASSACHUSETTS. 

Jamaica Plain, ch. 417 93 
Boston, Warren Av. ch., mon. con. 
coll., L. Beal tr., 53.50: a friend, 
250; a friend, 7.30; Charles St. 


& 
( 
I 
] 
ib 
: 
| 20 00 44 25 


1870.] 


ch.,a member, 10; Mrs, Hannah 
Billings, deceased, tow. sup. of nat. 
rs., care Rev. D. A. W. Smith, 
enthada, Burmah, 50 in silver, 
61; 4th St. ch., J. W. Hill tr. 
44.15; 

Newton Centre, 8. E. P. 

Grafton, Ist ch. 

Lynn, High St. ch., Ladies’ For. 
Miss. Soc., tow. sup. of nat. teach- 
er, care Rev. K. O. Stevens, Prome, 
Burmah, 

Brookline, Ist ch. and soc., mon. 
con. colls., Dea. Geo. Brooks tr., 

Somerville, M. A. 8. 

Andover, 8. 8. Richardson, 

West Acton, ch., mon. con. colls., 
James M. Brown tr., 

Chelsea, Cary Av. ch., 8. 8., tow. 
sup. of nat. pr., care Rev. D. A. 
W. Smith, Henthada, Burmah, G. 
C. Bosson tr., 

Haverhill, lst ch., of wh. 148.90 is 
mon. con. colls., Geo. Appleton 


tr. 

Worcester Asso., Willard Ward tr., 
Northboro’, ch. 19; Bellingham, 
ch. 15; 

Middleboro’, Ist ch., Chas. E. Jenny 
tr. 

Watertown, Mrs. Stevens 

Greenfield, Mrs. B. Ul. Crane 

Harvard, Sarah H. Knight 

Melrose, Ist ch., Geo. Newhall tr., 

Newburyport, ch., J. D. Pike tr., 


RULODE ISLAND. 


Providence, a friend, of wh. 5 is for 
the German Mission (not acknowl- 
edged before, on account of mis- 
take in forwarding), 


CONNECTICUT. 


Preston, ch., 8. 8., tow. sup. of girl 
in Miss A. R. Gage’s sch., Toungoo, 
Burmah, A. A. Llaskell tr., 

Mystic River, W. Hl. Randall 10; 
Mrs. Mary Randall 1; 


NEW YORK. 


Saratoga Springs, Sarah W. Cushing 

No. Chili, F. M. Benjamin, for Mrs, 
H. L. Van Meter’s sch., Bassein, 
Burmah, 

Galway, 2d ch., C. 0. Cook tr., 

Hamilton, Ist ch. 

Coll. per Rev. J. B. Pixley, Dist. 
Se 4 


Cayuga Asso., Jordan, ch., in part, 
6.50; Cato, ch. 8: Throopsviile, 
ch., in part, 19.30; Rev. J. G. 
Moore 1; Weedsport, ch. 16.60; 
Mrs. Hl. B. Crossett 1; Mr. C. B. 
Sprague 1; 

Niagara Asso., Newfane, ch.,in part, 
25.24; Lockport, ch., in part, 
42.58; 

Madison Asso., Cazenovia, ch., bal. 
80; Rev. J. B. Pixley 8.13; 

Coll. per Rev. O. Dodge, Dist. Sec., 

Rensselaerville Asso., 8. rne & Knox, 
ch., 27.50; Charleston, ch. 10; 
Duanesburgh & Floriia, ch. 15.27; 
Flat Creek, ch. 5; Greenville, ch. 
14; New Baltimore, ch. 5; Pres- 
ton Hollow, ch., 20; South Dur- 
ham, ch. 6; Westkill, ch. 10; 
Westerlo, ch., of wh. 20 is fr. Fem. 
Miss. Soc., 26; Gayhead, ch. 4.50; 

Dutchess Asso., Ameni+, ch., bal., 

Hudson River Central Asso , Sau- 
gerties,ch., in part,35,07; Pough- 
keepsie, ch., do., 45.45; Peekskill, 
ch., bal., 11.50; Rhinebeck, ch. 
25; Catskill, ch.. in port, 3); 

Long Island Asso., Oyster Bay, ch. 
14; Kast Marion, ch., bal., 2; 
Martha Loomis 1; 


Donations. 


Hudson River So. Asso., New York, 
Trinity ch.,in part, 70.09; 16th 
ch., 8. 8., Kincaid Miss. Soc. 60; 

Hudson River No. Asso., Troy, 1st 
ch. 85; 2d ch. 35; both extra, 
tow. passage of Rev. M. Bronson 
to Assam, 


NEW JERSEY 


Bloomfield, 1st ch., 8. 8. 
Coll. per Rev. J. V. Ambler, Dist. 


Sec., 
Roadstone, ch., bal., 15; Kingwood, 

ch. 30.10; Frenchtown, ch., in 

part, 30; 
Coll. per Rev. 0. Dodge, Dist. Sec., 
Passaic, ch., to const. Rev. Frank- 

lin Johnson H. L. M., Sam’! Groo- 

cock tr., 100 00 
Sussex Asso., Mt. Olive, ch.,in part, 26 86 
East New Jersey Asso., Jersey City, 

North ch., in part, 60.18; Lyous 

Farms, ch. 60; 110 18 


PENNSYLVANIA. 


South Auburn, Mrs. H. Gregory 55 00 

Bethany, Mrs. E. Torrey and daugh- 
ters 6.25; Mrs. N. Brooks 1.25; 
Mrs. 8. Brooks 1; Mr. B. Johns 1; 
M. T. Brown 1; Miss C. White 1; 
W. D. Brooks .50; 

St. Clair, Welch ch. 

Eaton, Thos. Mitchell, for the Shan 
Mission, 

Burrell, Peter Snively 

Philadelphia, L. A. C. 

Coll. per Rev. J. V. Ambler, Dist. 


Sec., 
Philadelphia Asso., Philadelphia, 

1%th ch., &. 8., Bible class 25; Ist 

German ch. 6.50; Pottsville, ch., 

of wh. 26 is fr. S. 8., 56; Marcus 

Hook, ch. 43; 130 50 
Clarion Asso., Warsaw, ch. 5; Sol- 

diers’ Run, ch. 21.64: Red Bank, 

ch. 4; West Chester, ch., bal. 5.50; 

Gethsemane, ch. 3 36; West Leb- 

anon, ch.4; Johnstown, ch. 4.29 ; 

Logan’s Valley, ch. 40; Smithfield, 

ch. 52.50 ; Sharpsburg, ch. 12.70; 152 99 


DELAWARE 
Coll. per Rev. J. V. Ambler, Dist 


Sec. 
Wilmington, Ist ch. 7.20; 2d ch., in 
part, 59.10; 


OHIO. 


Sandusky, Ist ch., mon. con. colls. 2 30 

Painesville, lst ch. 12 80 

Cleveland Asso., Wm. T. Smith tr., 
Cleveland, lst ch , Mrs. Mary KE. 
Monroe, tow. educating nat’ girl, 
care Mrs. M. B. Ingalls, Thongzai, 
Burmah, 109; Young People’s 
Miss. Soc., tow. sup. of nat. pr., 
care Mrs. E. P. Scott, Nowgong, 
Assam, John Steele tr., 80; 

Kingsville, Mra. L. W. Brown, tow. 
nat. pr., care 

v. Wm. Ward, Sib: r, Assam 

Bellville, Susan Phillips 

Cheviot, Mrs. Ann McFarlan and 
daughter 

Coll. per Rey. Thomas Allen, Dist. 


180 00 


Sec., 
Miami Union Asso., Dayton, Ist ch., 
in part, 82; Wayne &t. ch., John 
Temple 5; Ist German ch. 12.28; 
Springfield, Ist ch. 25; Columbia, 
ch., in part, 67.79; Locklan1, ch., 
in part, 101.95; of wh. 50 is fr. J. 
H. Tangerman, for sup. of nat. pr, 
among the Red Karens, care Rey, 
A. Bunker, Toungoo, Burmah, 294 02 


63 
130 09 
425 95 
1 00 70 00 860 73 
17 00 
25 00 
75 00 
20 67 
24 00 
10 00 
10 50 
80 12 
336 64 
517 00 : 
34 00 
100 00 J 
3) 00 
1 00 
1 00 
60 00 
25.00 1800 17 
45,00 
18 00 
1100 29 00 
50 00 
10 00 
25 10 
101 00 7 
66 80 
68 40 
67 82 
33 13 
148 27 
5 00 
149 92 
17 00 


64 


Columbus Asso., Sunb ch , of 
wh.650isf. 8.8." 
Cleveland ch., 8. 8. 
Mt. Vernon Asso., Radnor, ch., in 
part, 
Loraine Asso. , Joseph Lester 
Straight Creek Asso. , Coll. at Asso. 
Mad River Asso. , De Graff, ch., W. 
Quiney, ch., in part, 


Zoar Asso., Coll. at Asso. 

Trumbull ‘Asso. , Warren, ch., Young 
People’s Miss. Soc., tow. sup. of 
nat. pr., care Mrs. 'M. B. Ingalls, 
Thongzai, Burmah, 

Clinton Asso. , New Vienna, ch., of 
wh. 6 is fr. 'S. 8. , in part, 98.65 ; 
Cowan’s Creek, ch. 14.30; Sugar 
Creek, ch. 5.56 ; Washington, ch., 
in part, 4.65; ” Good Hope, ch. 
10.08 ; Roxabel, ch. 26.07 ; 


INDIANA. 
Coll. per Rev. Thomas Allen, Dist. 
Sec., 


Judson Agso., Alto, ch. 10.75; Rev. 
P. McDade 5 ; Deer Creek, ch. 9; 

Weasaw Creek Asso., Rochester, ch. 

Indianapolis Asso. » Miss Maria 


Pitcher 
ILLINOIS. 


Waterloo, Rev. T. J. Kortzl 
Coll. per "Rev. S. M. Dist. 


Sec. 

Carroliton Asso., Jerseyville, ch. 

Chicago Asso., Elgin, ch., 8. 8., qr. 
payt., tow. sup. of Ramsing, nat. 
Garo pr., care Rey. I. J. Stoddard, 
Gowalpara, Assam, 

Dixon Asso., Morrison, ch., 8. §8., 
tow. sup of ministerial students, 
care Rey. J. E. Clough, Ongole, 
India, 

Edwardsville Asso., Alton, lst ch., 
of wh. 59.51 is tow. sup. of Rev. 
M. Jameson, Bassein, Burmah, 
39.87 for Bible distribution in For- 
eign lands; 84.75 fr. 8. 8., for 
Rangoon Theo. Sem. , 133.68 ; ” Up- 
per Alton, Shurtleff ‘Coliege Stu- 
dents’ Miss. Soc. 11.35 ; 

Fox River Asso., Chicago, Ist ch., of 
wh. 300 is fr. 8. 8., 971.26; Evans- 
ton, 8. 8., tow. passage of Rev. M. 
Bronson ‘to Assam, 10; Mokena, 
ch. 12.15 ; 

Mackinaw Asso., Fairburgh, ch., of 
wh. 3 is fr. ©. L. Patton, 1 fr. Mrs. 
Hanna, and 6 fr. Belle Prairie 
Mission, 

McLean Asso., Normal, ch. 

Nine Mile Asso., Duquoin, ch., a sis- 
ter 

Ottawa Asso., Amboy, ch.,8. 8., tow. 
= of Habe, a Mikir nat. pr., As- 


one Asso., Perry, ch., J. B. 
Cooper, New Salem, 

Rock River Asso , Rockford, Ist ch., 
4 vas 50 is fr. Mrs. Mary Mor- 


my Asso., Roseville, ch. 


IOWA. 


per Rev. M. Osgood, Dist. 

c. 

Cedar "Valley Asso., Osage, ch. 1; 
a aterloo, ch. 21; Waverly, ch: 
27.60 

Central Iowa Asso., Des Moines, ch. 

East Grand River Asso. , Afton, "ch. 

Eden Asso., Chariton, ch, 

English River Arso., Cedar Creek, 
ch. 5; Pella, Qdch. 5 50; 

Oskaloosa Aeso. Oskaloosa, "ch. 7 7.755 
Pella, ch. 22; 

Upper Des Moines Asso., Iowa Falls, 


Donalions. 


19 04 
10 00 


21 75 
2 00 
13 28 


15 96 
16 90 


1000 177938 | 


MICHIGAN. 


Grand Rapids, ch., 8. 8., to be ex- 
pended in care of Rev. L. Jewett 
and wife, Nellore, India, 

Brady, ch. 

Coll. per Rev. 8. M. Osgood, Dist. 


Sec., 

Flint River Asso., Fenton, ch., of 
wh. 5 is fr. Mrs. Mary P. Hudson, 
tow. sup. of Mrs. L. Jewett, and 
50 fr. 8. 8., tow. sup. of Conakiah, 
nat. pr., care Rey. L. Jewett, Nel- 
lore, India, 55; Hadley, ch, of 
= 10 is fr. Rev. W. D. Potter, 


Jackson Asso., Grass Lake, ch. 
81.50; Norvell, ch. 11.50; 

Kalamazoo River Asso., Climax, ch. 
4.45; Kalamazoo, Rey. H. Stan- 
wood 5; Marshall, ch. 2.25; 

Lenawee Asso., Adrian, ch., Mrs. W. 
8. Wilcox 

Michigan Asso., Romeo, ch. 

St. Joseph’s Valley Asso., Mendon, 
ch. 

Washtenaw Asso., Ann Arbor, ch., 
Young People’s Miss. Asso. 

Wayne Asso., Farmington, ch., 8. 8. 
8.48 ; Hartland, ch. 12; Holly, 
ch. 1.50; Salem, ch. 21. 58; 


MINNESOTA. 

Coll. per Rev. 8. M. Osgood, Dist. 
Sec. 

Minnesota Asso., Hastings, Mrs. 
Kliza W Merrill 

No. Minn. Asso., Monticello, ch., 
Rev. G. B. Bills 

MISSOURI. 

Coll. per Rev. 8. M. Osgood, Dist. 
Sec., 

St. Louis, Coll. at Nat. 8. 8. Conven- 
tion, Piqua, 8. 8., tow. passage of 
Rev. M. Bronson to Assam, 

WISCONSIN. 

Superior, a friend 

Fond du Lac, a friend, for Rev. H. 


Jenkins’ sch., Ningpo, China, 
Coll. per Rev. 8. M. Osgood, Dist. 


Sec., 
La Fayette Asso., Darlington, ch. 
KANSAS. 


Coll. per Rev. 8S. M. Osgood, Dist. 
Sec. 
Black Jack, ch. 
CANADA. 


Ontario, Port Hope, Wm. Craig 
20.58; Woodstock, Rev. John 
Bates 1 ; 


SIAM. 


Bangkok, Contributions of mission- 
aries, for the Scriptures, 


LEGACIES. 


Brunswick, Me., Sarah Woodward 
per John Rogers, Exr., in part, 
Middleboro’, Mass., Miss Hannah 

Harlow, per 8. Benson, Exr., bal. 
East Smithfield, Penn., Sam’l Far- 
well, per Sam’! Niles, 


Donations and Legacies from April 1, 
to 


1, 1869, 


Donations and Legacies from April 1, 
1869, to Jan. 1, 1870, 


(February, 187, 


186 60 


$6,613 83 


. 150 00 
716 80 


180 00 996 80 
$7,610 68 
$59,570 11 


$67,180 74 


| 40 00 
60 00 | 78 00 
| 48 00 
97 28 782 83 | 11 80 
| 25 00 
8 40 
| 
| 6 50 
| 
24 75 84 45 
7 00 
500 8675) 88 290 63 
00 | 
4 700 | 
15 00 
| 500 20 00 
é 
10 00 | 
| 
10 00 | 
| 8 75 
145 05 | 
: | 40 00 
725 6100 
: 998.41 
9 45 
5 00 
| 
160 
| 
13 30 1,382 84 
| 
49 60 
45 
27 61 
| 
29 75 —— 


