Source: Albert W. Wardin Jr., "How Indigenous Was the Baptist Movement in the Russian Empire?", Journal of European Baptist Studies, vol. IX, no. 2 (January 2009), pp. 29-37.
Open full text + downloadable PDF: CyberLeninka / Theological Reflections (Bogoslovskie razmyshleniya).
URL: https://cyberleninka.ru/article/n/how-indigenous-was-the-baptist-movement-in-the-russian-empire
Verified 2026-06-19. Excerpts only; not the full article.

--- ABSTRACT (verbatim) ---
Russian Evangelical Christians-Baptists exhibit their indigenous character today. This is seen in their worship, whose tenor and pulsation significantly differ from the West. How indigenous are Russian Baptists? There is no easy answer. In origin or development they are simply not an implantation from another nation or culture. On the other hand, Protestant as well as Baptist impulses from abroad have influenced them. It should be recognized that German Baptists took advantage of the evangelical movement already developing in the Russian Empire. They were not initiators of the movement but facilitators in moving it to what they considered were more consistent biblical principles.

--- OPENING / POLEMIC TARGETS (verbatim excerpt) ---
In reviewing a religious movement, the question often arises: How indigenous is it? ... In a recent issue of the International Bulletin of Missionary Research, Jeffrey Cox ... has come to the conclusion: "Yet Third World Christian churches are neither independent of Western influences nor purely indigenous; in historical terms, they are hybrid, the results of a dialectical relationship between missionaries and non-Western Christians."

What about Baptists in Russia? From the start, Baptists have been attacked for being a foreign import, incompatible with the culture of the country and a threat to society. N. I. Petrov, in his article, "Novyya svedeniya o shtundisme," wrote:
...in the beginning of the 70s missionaries of Baptism were deliberately sent out from Hamburg to the German Kherson colonies; they find there fortuitously Ukrainian workers - people for a long time already isolated from the family and society with the church [-] without difficulty they master them and turn them into an instrument of spreading their heresy among the people, never having had knowledge of the heresy.
[footnote 2: Trudy Kievskoi Dukhovnoi Akademii, No. 3 (1887): 383.]

One of the chief proponents of rejecting the indigenous character of the evangelical movement or Stundism in Russia is Alexii Dorodnitsyn, a Russian Orthodox anti-sectarian missionary, later a bishop and rector of Kazan Religious Academy, a collector of official documents, and writer of a number of works on Stundism and Baptists. His 1903 work, Yuzhno-Russkii Neobaptism, izvestnyi pod imenem shtundy (South-Russian Neobaptism, known by the name Stunda), first of all identifies the Baptist movement with continental Anabaptism, including its revolutionary manifestation in Munster, Germany - an old falsehood. He rejects the thesis that Ukrainian Stundism arose from the German colonies in Russia but insists it is a product of German Baptist missionaries from abroad. He wrote at a time of intense Germanophobia ...

--- KALWEIT / VORONIN (verbatim excerpt) ---
Baptist work in the Caucasus began with the migration in 1861 of Martin K. Kalweit (1833-1918) with his wife and two sisters to the area of Tiflis, today Tbilisi in the country of Georgia. Kalweit was a German of Lithuanian extraction but born a Russian subject and lived in Kovno Province near the Russian-German border. After his migration, Kalweit at first felt isolated and almost abandoned, even fearing the Russian people. He nevertheless began to hold worship services, using both German and Russian. On August 20, 1867 (o.s.), Kalweit baptized Nikita I. Voronin (1840-1905), the first Russian Baptist convert, a Molokan who was searching the Scripture and sought baptism. Molokans were a native Russian sect that rejected all sacraments, including those of the Orthodox Church. Voronin preached among his fellow Molokans, gathering a group that numbered ten by 1871.

--- ROZHDESTVENSKY SUMMARY (paraphrase by Wardin) ---
Wardin cites Arsenii Rozhdestvenskii, Yuzhnorusskii shtundizm: Ukrainian Stundism helped to create among the Orthodox a critical attitude toward the Orthodox faith but few Ukrainians became pure Lutherans or pure Reformed. Russian Stundism borrowed more from various Protestant sects, including the Baptists, taking the greater part of its Protestant teaching in fragments, not in pure original form, and ultimately developed its own form.

--- AUTHOR NOTE (verbatim) ---
Albert W. Wardin is professor emeritus of history at Belmont University in Nashville, Tennessee, where he taught 26 years, and a former president of the Southern Baptist Historical Society. He is author or editor of various historical works, including Baptists around the World: A Comprehensive Handbook (1995). Dr. Wardin is a life-long Baptist. His grandparents came from Baptist families who migrated to the United States from East Prussia in Germany and the Ukraine.

EDITORIAL NOTE: Per project editorial policy, no English direct quotations may appear in reader-facing Russian article text. Use Russian translation + source identifier when transferring.
